1 Industrial Society and Its Future Theodore Kaczynski 1995 This essay first appeared appeared in The New York Times and The Washington Post on Sept 19 , 1995 . It wa published under the pseudonym FC , for Freedom Club . The version you are read ing began with the version found at http : //editions -hache.com/ but ha corrected a number of typo and adjusted some of the typesetting . PR , 2019 . INTRODUCTION 1 . The Industrial Revolution and it consequence have been a disaster for the human race . They have greatly increased the life- expectancy of those of u who live in “ advanced ” country , but they have destabilized society , have made life unfulfilling , have subjected human being to indignity , have led to widespread psychological suffering ( in the Third World to physical suffering a well ) and have inflicted severe damage on the natural world . The continued development of technology will worsen the situation . It will certainly subject human being s to greater indignity and inflict greater damage on the natural world , it will probably lead to greater social disruptio n and psychological suffering , and it may lead to increased physical suffering even in “ advanced ” country . 2 . The industrial -technological system may survive or it may break down . If it survives , it may eventually achieve a low level of physical and psychological suffering , but only after passing through a long and very painful period of adjustment and only at the cost of permanently reducing human being and many other living organism to engineered product and mere cog in the social machine . Furthermore , if the system survives , the consequence will be inevitable : There is no way of reforming or modifying the system so a to prevent it from depriving people of dignity and autonomy . 3 . If the system break down the consequence will still be very painful . But the bigger the system grows the more disastrous the result of it breakdown will be , so if it is to break down it had best break down sooner rather than later . 4 . We therefore advocate a revolution against the industrial system . This revolution may or may not make use of violence ; it may be sudden or it may be a relatively gradual process spanning a few decade . We can ’ t predict any of that . But we do outline in a very general way the measure that those who hate the industrial system should take in order to prepare the way for a revolution against that form of society . This is not to be a political revolution . Its object will be to overthrow not government but the economic and technological basis of the pr esent society . 5 . In this article we give attention to only some of the negative development that have grown out of the industrial -technological system . Othe r such development we mention only briefly or ignore altogether . This doe not mean that we regard these other development a 2 unimportant . For practical reason we have to confine our discussion to area that have received insufficient public attention or in which we have something new to say . For example , since there are well -developed environmental and wilderness movement , we have written very little about environmental degradation or the destruction of wild nature , even though we consider these to be highly important . THE PSYCHOLOGY OF MODERN LEFTISM 6 . Almost everyone will agree that we live in a deeply troubled society . One of the most widespread mani festations of the craziness of our world is leftism , so a discussion of the psychology of leftism can serve a an introduction to the discussion of the problem of modern society in general . 7 . But what is leftism ? During the first half of the 20th century leftism could have been practically identified with socialism . Today the movement is fragmented and it is not clear who can properly be called a leftist . When we speak of leftist in this article we have in mind mainly socialist , collectivist , “ politically correct ” type , feminist , gay and disability activist , animal right activist and the like . But not everyone who is associated with one of these move ments is a leftist . What we are trying to get at in discussing leftism is not so much movement or an ideology a a psychological type , or rather a collection of related type . Thus , what we mean by “ leftism ” will emerge more clearly in the course of our discussion of leftist psychology . ( Also , see paragraph 227- 230 . ) 8 . Even so , our conception of leftism will remain a good deal le clear than we would wish , but there doesn ’ t seem to be any remedy for this . All we are trying to do here is indicate in a rough and approximate way the two psychological tendency that we believe are the main driving force of modern leftism . We by no mean claim to be telling t he whole truth about leftist psychology . Also , our discussion is meant to apply to modern leftism only . We leave open the question of the extent to which our discussion could be applied to the leftist of the 19th and early 20th century . 9 . The two psychological tendency that underlie modern leftism we call “ feeling of inferiority ” and “ oversocialization ” . Feelings of inferiority are characteristic of mod ern leftism a a whole , while oversocialization is characteristic only of a certain segment of modern leftism ; but this segment is highly influential . FEELINGS OF INFERIORITY 10 . By “ feeling of inferiority ” we mean not only inferiority feeling in the strict sense but a whole spectrum of related trait ; low self -esteem , feeling of powerlessness , depressive tendency , defeatism , guilt , self -hatred , etc . We a rgue that modern leftist tend to have some such feeling ( possibly more or le repressed ) and that these feeling are decisive in determining the direction of modern leftism . 11 . When someone interprets a derogatory almost anything that is said about him ( or about group with whom he identifies ) we conclude that he ha inferiority feeling or low self -3 esteem . This tendency is pronounced among minority right s activist , whether or not they belong to the minority group whose right they defend . They are hypersensitive about the word used to designate minority and about anything that is said concerning minority . The term “ negro ” , “ oriental ” , “ handicapp ed ” or “ chick ” for an African , an Asian , a disabled person or a woman originally had no derogatory connotation . “ Broad ” and “ chick ” were merely the feminine equivalent of “ guy ” , “ dude ” or “ fellow ” . The negative connotation have been attached to these term by the activist themselves . Some animal right activist have gone so far a to reject the word “ pet ” and insist on it replacement by “ animal companion ” . Leftish anthropologist go to great length to avoid saying anything about primitive people tha t could conceivably be interpreted a negative . They want to replace the word “ primitive ” by “ nonliterate ” . They seem almost paranoid about anything that might suggest that any primitive culture is inferior to our own . ( We do not mean to imply that primo tive culture are inferior to ours . We merely point out the hyper sensitivity of leftish anthropologist . ) 12 . Those who are most sensitive about “ politicall y incorrect ” terminology are not the average black ghetto -dweller , Asian immigrant , abused woman or disabled person , but a minority of activist , many of whom do not even belong to any “ oppressed ” group but come from privileged stratum of society . Politica l correctness ha it stronghold among university professor , who have secure employment with comfortable salary , and the majority of whom are heterosexual white male from middle - to upper -middle -class family . 13 . Many leftist have an intense identification with the problem of group that have an image of being weak ( woman ) , defeated ( American Indians ) , repellent ( homosexual ) or otherwise inferior . The leftist themselves feel that these group are inferior . They would never admit to themselves that they have such feeling , but it is precisely because they do see these group a inferior that they identify with their problem . ( We do not mean to sugge st that woman , Indians , etc . are inferior ; we are only making a point about leftist psychology . ) 14 . Feminists are desperately anxious to prove that woman ar e a strong and a capable a men . Clearly they are nagged by a fear that woman may not be a strong and a capable a men . 15 . Leftists tend to hate anythin g that ha an image of being strong , good and successful . They hate America , they hate Western civilization , they hate white male , they hate rationality . The reason that leftist give for hating the West , etc . clearly do not correspond with their real motif . They say they hate the West because it is warlike , imperialistic , sexist , ethnocentric and so forth , but where these same fault appear in socialist country or in primitive culture , the leftist find excuse for them , or at best he grudgingly admits that they exist ; whereas he enthusiastically point out ( and often greatly exaggerates ) these fault where they appear in Western civilization . Thus it is clear that these fault are not the leftist ’ s real motive for hating America and the West . He hate America and the West because they are strong and successful . 16 . Words like “ self -confidence ” , “ self -reliance ” , “ initiative ” , “ enterprise ” , “ optimism ” , etc. , play little role in the liberal and leftist vocabulary . The leftist is anti- individualistic , pro- collectivist . He want society to solve every one ’ s problem for them , satisfy everyone ’ s need for them , take care of them . He is not the sort of person who ha an inner sense of confidence in 4 his ability to solve his own problem and satisfy his own need . The leftist is antago nistic to the concept of competition because , deep inside , he feel like a loser . 17 . Art form that appeal to modern leftish intellectual tend to focus on sordidness , defeat and despair , or else they take an orgiastic tone , throwing off rational control a if there were no hope of accomplishing anything through rational calculation and all that wa left wa to immerse oneself in the sensation of the moment . 18 . Modern leftish philos ophers tend to dismiss reason , science , and objective reality , and to insist that everything is culturally relative . It is true that one can ask serious question about the foundation of scientific knowledge and about how , if at all , the concept of objec tive reality can be defined . But it is obvious that modern leftish philosopher are not simply cool -headed logician systematically analyzing the foundation of knowledge . They are deeply involved emotionally in their attack on truth and reality . They a ttack these concept because of their own psychological need . For one thing , their attack is an outlet for hostility , and , to the extent that it is successful , it satisfies the drive for power . More importantly , the leftist hate science and rationality because they classify certain belief a true ( i.e. , successful , superior ) and other belief a false ( i.e. , failed , inferior ) . The leftist ’ s feeling of inferiority run so deep that he can not tolerate any classification of some thing a successful or s uperior and other thing a failed or inferior . This also underlies the rejection by many leftist of the concept of mental illness and of the utility of IQ test . Leftists are antagonistic to genetic explanation of human ability or behavior because s uch explanation tend to make some person appear superior or inferior to others . Leftists prefer to give society the credit or blame for an individual ’ s ability or lack of it . Thus if a person is “ inferior ” it is not his fault , but society ’ s , because he ha not been brought up properly . 19 . The leftist is not typically the kind of person whose feeling of inferiority make him a braggart , an egotist , a bully , a self -promoter , a ruthless competitor . This kind of person ha not wholly lost faith in himself . He ha a deficit in his sense of power and self -worth , but he can still conceive of himself a having the capacity to be strong , and his effort to make hi mself strong pr oduce his unpleasant behavior.1 But the leftist is too far gone for that . His feeling of inferiority are so ingrained that he can not conceive of himself a individually strong and valuable . Hence the collectivism of the leftist . He can f eel strong only a a member of a large organization or a mass movement with which he identifies himself . 20 . Notice the masochistic tendency of leftist tactic s . Leftists protest by lying down in front of vehicle , they intentionally provoke police or racist to abuse them , etc . These tactic may often be effective , but many leftist use them not a a mean to an end but because they prefer masochistic tactic . Self -hatred is a leftist trait . 21 . Leftists may claim that their activism is motivated by compassion or by moral principle , and moral principle doe play a role for the leftist of the oversocialized type . But compassion and moral principle can not be the main motif for leftist activism . Hostility is too prominent a component of leftist behavior ; so is the drive for power . Moreover , much leftist behavior is not rationally calculated to be of benefit to the people whom the leftist claim to be trying to help . For example , if one belief that affirmative action is good for black people , doe it make sense to demand affirmative action in hostile or dogmat ic term ? Obviously it would be more productive 5 to take a diplomatic and conciliatory approach that would make at least verbal and symbolic concession to white people who think that affirmative action discriminates against them . But leftist activist do not take such an approach because it would not satisfy their emotional need . Helping black people is not their real goal . Instead , race problem serve a an excuse for them to express their own hostility and frustrated need for power . In doing so they actually harm black people , because the activist ’ hostile attitude toward the white majority tends to intensify race hatred . 22 . If our society had no social problem at all , the leftist would have to invent problem in order to provide themselves with an excuse for making a fuss . 23 . We emphasize that the forego ing doe not pretend to be an accurate description of everyone who might be considered a leftist . It is only a rough indication of a general tendency of leftism . OVERSOCIALIZATION 24 . Psychologists use the term “ socialization ” to designate the process by which child are trained to think and act a society demand . A person is said to be well socialized if he belief in and obeys the moral code of his soci ety and fit in well a a functioning part of that society . It may seem senseless to say that many leftist are over -socialized , since the leftist is perceived a a rebel . Nevertheless , the position can be defended . Many leftist are not such rebel a they seem . 25 . The moral code of our society is so demanding that no one can think , feel and act in a completely moral way . For example , we are not supposed to hate anyone , yet almost everyone hate somebody at some time or other , whether he admits it to himself or not . Some people are so highly socialized that the attempt to think , feel and act morally imposes a severe burden on them . In order to avoid feel ings of guilt , they continually have to deceive themselves about their own motif and find moral explanation for feeling and action that in reality have a non- moral origin . We use the term “ oversocialized ” to describe such people.2 26 . Oversocialization can lead to low self -esteem , a sense of powerlessness , defeatism , guilt , etc . One of the most important mean by which our society socializes child is by making them feel ashamed of behavior or speech that is contrary to society ’ s expectation . If this is overdone , or if a particular child is especially susceptible to such feeling , he end by feeling ashamed of himself . Moreover the thought and the be havior of the oversocialized person are more restricted by society ’ s expectation than are those of the lightly socialized person . The majority of people engage in a significant amount of naughty behavior . They lie , they commit petty theft , they break traffic law , they goof off at work , they hate someone , they say spiteful thing or they use some underhanded trick to get ahead of the other guy . The oversocialized person can not do these thing , or if he doe do them he generates in himself a sense of shame and self -hatred . The oversocialized person can not even experience , without guilt , thought or feeling that are contrary to the accepted morality ; he can not think “ unclean ” thought . And socialization is not just a matter of morality ; we are socializ ed to conform to many norm of behavior that do not fall under the heading of morality . Thus the oversocialized person is kept on a psychological leash and spends his life running on rail that society ha laid down for him . In many oversocialized people this result in 6 a sense of constraint and powerlessness that can be a severe hardship . We suggest that oversocialization is among the more serious cruelty that human being inflict on one another . 27 . We argue that a very important and influential segment of the modern left is oversocialized and that their oversocialization is of great importance in determining the direction of modern leftism . Leftists of the oversocialized type tend to be intellectual or member of the upper -middle class . Notice t hat university intellectuals3 constitute the most highly socialized segment of our society and also the most leftwing segment . 28 . The leftist of the oversocialized type try to get off his psychological leash and assert his autonomy by rebelling . But usually he is not strong enough to rebel against the most basic v alues of society . Generally speaking , the goal of today ’ s leftist are not in conflict with the accepted morality . On the contrary , the left take an accepted moral principle , adopts it a it own , and then accuses mainstream society of violating that p rinciple . Examples : racial equality , equality of the sex , helping poor people , peace a opposed to war , nonviolence generally , freedom of expression , kindness to animal . More fundamentally , the duty of the individual to serve society and the duty of s ociety to take care of the individual . All these have been deeply rooted value of our society ( or at least of it middle and upper classes4 for a long time . These value are explicitly or implicitly expressed or presupposed in most of the material prese nted to u by the mainstream communication medium and the educational system . Leftists , especially those of the oversocialized type , usually do not rebel against these principle but justify their hostility to society by claiming ( with some degree of trut h ) that society is not living up to these principle . 29 . Here is an illustration of the way in which the oversocialized leftist show his real attachment to the conventional attitude of our society while pretending to be in rebellion aginst it . Many leftist push for affirmative action , for moving black people into high- prestige job , for improved education in black school and more money for such school ; t he way of life of the black “ underclass ” they regard a a social disgrace . They want to integrate the black man into the system , make him a business executive , a lawyer , a scientist just like upper -middle -class white people . The leftist will reply that the last thing they want is to make the black man into a copy of the white man ; instead , they want to preserve African American culture . But in what doe this preservation of African American culture consist ? It can hardly consist in anything more than eating black- style food , listening to black- style music , wearing black -style clothing and going to a black -style church or mosque . In other word , it can express itself only in superficial matter . In all essential respect most leftist of the oversocialized type want to make the black man conform to white , middle -class ideal . They want to make him study technical subject , become an executive or a scientist , spend his life climbing the status ladder to prove that black people are a good a white . They want to make black father “ responsible , ” they want black gang to become nonviolent , etc . But these are exactly the value of the industrial -technological system . The system couldn ’ t care le what kind of music a man listens to , what kind of clothes he wear or what religion he belief in a long a he study in school , hold a respectable job , climb the status ladder , is a “ responsible ” parent , is nonviolent and so forth . In effect , however much he may deny it , the oversocialized leftist want to integrate the black man into the system and make him adopt it value . 7 30 . We certainly do not claim that leftist , even of the oversocialized type , never rebel against the fundamental value of our society . Clearly they sometimes do . Some oversocialized leftist have gone so far a to rebel against one of modern society ’ s most important principle by engaging in physical violence . By their own account , violence is for them a form of “ liberation . ” In other word , by committing violence they break through the psychological restraint that have been trained into them . Because they are oversocialized these restraint have been more confining for them than for others ; hence their need to break free of them . But they usually justify their rebellion in term of mainstream value . If they engage in violence they claim to be fighting against racism or the like . 31 . We realize that many objection could be raised to the foregoing thumbnail sketch of leftist psychology . The real situation is complex , and anything like a complete description of it would take several volu me even if the necessary data were available . We claim only to have indicated very roughly the two most important tendency in the psychology of modern leftism . 32 . The problem of the leftist are indicative of the problem of our society a a whole . Low self - esteem , depressive tendency and defeatism are not restricted to the left . Though they are especially noticeable in the left , they are widespread in our society . And today ’ s society try to socialize u to a greater extent than any previous society . We are even told by expert how to eat , how to exercise , how to make love , how to raise our kid and so forth . THE POWER PROCESS 33 . Human being have a need ( probably based in biology ) for something that we will call the power process . This is closely related to the need for power ( which is widely recognize d ) but is not quite the same thing . The power process ha four element . The three most clear -cut of these we call goal , effort and attainment of goal . ( Everyone need to have goal whose attainment requires effort , and need to succeed in attaining at least some of his goal . ) The fourth element is more difficult to define and may not be necessary for everyone . We call it autonomy and will discus it later ( paragraph 42 -44 ) . 34 . Consider the hypothetical case of a man who can have anything he want just by wishing for it . Such a man ha power , but he will develop serious psychological problem . At first he will have a lot of fun , but by and by he will be come acutely bored and demoralized . Eventually he may become clinically depressed . History show that leisured aristocracy tend to become decadent . This is not true of fighting aristocracy that have to struggle to maintain their power . But leisured , secure aristocracy that have no need to exert themselves usually become bored , hedonistic and demoralized , even though they have power . This show that power is not enough . One must have goal toward which to exercise one ’ s power . 35 . Everyone ha goal ; if nothing else , to obtain the physical necessity of life : food , water and whatever clothing and shelter are made necessary by the climate . But the le isured aristocrat obtains these thing without effort . Hence his boredom and demoralization . 8 36 . Nonattainment of important goal result in death if the goa l are physical necessity , and in frustration if non- attainment of the goal is compatible with survival . Consistent failure to attain goal throughout life result in defeatism , low self -esteem or depression . 37 . Thus , in order to avoid serious psychological problem , a human being need goal whose attainment requires effort , and he must have a reasonable rate of success in attaining his goal . SURROGATE ACTIVITIES 38 . But not every leisured aristocrat becomes bored and demoralized . For example , the emperor Hirohito , instead of sinking into decadent hedonism , devoted himself to marine biology , a field in which he became distinguished . When people do not have to exert themselves to satisfy their physical need they often set up artificial goal for themselves . In many case they then pursue these goal with th e same energy and emotional involvement that they otherwise would have put into the search for physical necessity . Thus the aristocrat of the Roman Empire had their literary pretension ; many European aristocrat a few century ago invested tremendous time and energy in hunting , though they certainly didn ’ t need the meat ; other aristocracy have competed for status through elaborate display of wealth ; and a few aristocrat , like Hirohito , have turned to science . 39 . We use the term “ surrogate activity ” to designate an activity that is directed toward an artificial goal that people set up for themselves merely in order to have some goal to work toward , or let u say , merely for the s ake of the “ fulfillment ” that they get from pursuing the goal . Here is a rule of thumb for the identification of surrogate activity . Given a person who devotes much time and energy to the pursuit of goal X , ask yourself thi s : If he had to devote most of his time and energy to satisfying his biological need , and if that effort required him to use his physical and mental faculty in a varied and interesting way , would he feel seriously deprived because he did not attain goal X ? If the answer is no , then the person ’ s pursuit of goal X is a surrogate activity . Hirohito ’ s study in marine biology clearly constituted a surrogate activity , since it is pretty certain that if Hirohito had had to spend his time working at interesti ng non- scientific task in order to obtain the necessity of life , he would not have felt deprived because he didn ’ t know all about the anatomy and life -cycles of marine animal . On the other hand the pursuit of sex and love ( for example ) is not a surrogate activity , because most people , even if their existence were otherwise satisfactory , would feel deprived if they passed their life without ever having a relationship with a member of the opposite sex . ( But pursuit of an excessive amount of sex , more t han one really need , can be a surrogate activity . ) 40 . In modern industrial society only minimal effort is necessary to satisfy one ’ s physical need . It is enough to go through a training program to acquire some petty technical skill , then come to work on time and exert the very modest effort needed to hold a job . The only requirement are a moderate amount of intelligence and , most of all , simple obedience . If one ha those , society take care of one from cradle to grave . ( Yes , there is an underclass that can not take the physical necessity for granted , but we are speaking here of mainstream society . ) Thus it is not surprising that modern society is full of surrogate activity . These include scientific work , athletic achievement , humanitarian work , artistic and literary creation , climbing the corporate ladder , acquisition of money and material good far beyond the point at which they cease to give any additional physical satisfaction , and social activism when it address issue that are not important 9 for the activist personally , a in the case of white activist who work for the right of nonwhite minority . These are not always pure surrogate activity , since for many people they may be motivated in part by need other than the need to have some goal to pursue . Scientific work may be motivated in part by a drive for prestige , artistic creation by a need to express feeling , militant social activism b y hostility . But for most people who pursue them , these activity are in large part surrogate activity . For example , the majority of scientist will probably agree that the “ fulfillment ” they get from their work is more important than the money and pr estige they earn . 41 . For many if not most people , surrogate activity are le satisfying than the pursuit of real goal ( that is , goal that people would w ant to attain even if their need for the power process were already fulfilled ) . One indication of this is the fact that , in many or most case , people who are deeply involved in surrogate activity are never satisfied , never at rest . Thus the money -make r constantly strives for more and more wealth . The scientist no sooner solves one problem than he move on to the next . The long -distance runner drive himself to run always farther and faster . Many people who pursue surrogate activity will say that they get far more fulfillment from these activity than they do from the “ mundane ” business of satisfying their biological need , but that is because in our society the effort needed to satisfy the biological need ha been reduced to triviality . More imp ortantly , in our society people do not satisfy their biological need autonomously but by functioning a part of an immense social machine . In contrast , people generally have a great deal of autonomy in pursuing their surrogate activity . AUTONOMY 42 . Autonomy a a part of the power process may not be necessary for every individual . But most people need a greater or lesser degree of autonomy in working towa rd their goal . Their effort must be undertaken on their own initiative and must be under their own direction and control . Yet most people do not have to exert this initiative , direction and control a single individual . It is usually enough to act a a member of a small group . Thus if half a dozen people discus a goal among themselves and make a successful joint effort to attain that goal , their need for the power process will be served . But if they work under rigid order handed down from above that leave them no room for autonomous decision and initiative , then their need for the power process will not be served . The same is true when decision are made on a collective basis if the group making the collective decision is so large that the role of each i ndividual is insignificant.5 43 . It is true that some individual seem to have little need for autonomy . Either their drive for power is weak or they satisfy it by identifying themselves with some powerful organization to which they belong . And then there are unthinking , animal type who seem to be satisfied with a purely physical sense of power ( the good combat soldier , who get his sense of power by developing fighting skill that he is quite content to use in blind obedience to his superior ) . 44 . But for most people it is through the power process —havin g a goal , making an autonomous effort and attaining the goal —that self -esteem , self -confidence and a sense of power are acquired . When one doe not have adequate opportunity to go through the power process the consequence are ( depending on the individual and on the way the power process is disrupted ) boredom , demoralization , low self -esteem , inferiority feeling , defeatism , depression , anxiety , 10 guilt , frustration , hostility , spouse or child abuse , insatiable hedonism , abnormal sexual behavior , sleep disor ders , eating disorder , etc.6 SOURCES OF SOCIAL PROBLEMS 45 . Any of the foregoing symptom can occur in any society , but in modern industrial society they are present on a massive scale . We aren ’ t the first to mention that the world today seems to be going crazy . This sort of thing is not normal for human society . There is good reason to believe that primitive man suffered from le stress and frustration and wa better satisfied with his way of life than modern man is . It is true that not all wa sweetness and light in primitive society . Abuse of woman wa common among the Australian aborigine , transexuality wa fairly common among some of the America n Indian tribe . But it doe appear that generally speaking the kind of problem that we have listed in the preceding paragraph were far le common among primitive people than they are in modern society . 46 . We attribute the social and psychological problem of modern society to the fact that that society requires people to live under condition radically different from those under which the human race evol ved and to behave in way that conflict with the pattern of behavior that the human race developed while living under the earlier condition . It is clear from what we have already written that we consider lack of opportunity to properly experience the power process a the most important of the abnormal condition to which modern society subject people . But it is not the only one . Before dealing with disruption of the power process a a source of social problem we will discus some of the other source . 47 . Among the abnormal condition present in modern industrial society are excessive density of population , isolation of man from nature , excessive rapidity of social change and the breakdown of natural small- scale community such a the extended family , the village or the tribe . 48 . It is well known that crowdi ng increase stress and aggression . The degree of crowding that exists today and the isolation of man from nature are consequence of technological progress . All pre-industrial society were predominantly rural . The Industrial Revolution vastly increas ed the size of city and the proportion of the population that life in them , and modern agricultural technology ha made it possible for the Earth to support a far denser population than it ever did before . ( Also , technology exacerbates the effect of crowding because it put increased disruptive power in people ’ s hand . For example , a variety of noise -making device : power mower , radio , motorcycle , etc . If the use of these device is unrestricted , people who want peace and quiet are frustrated by the noise . If their use is restricted , people who use the device are frustrated by the regulation . But if these machine had never been invented there would have been no conflict and no frustration generated by them . ) 49 . For primitive society the natural world ( which usually change only slowly ) provided a stable framework and therefore a sense of security . In the modern world it is human society that dominates nature rather than the other way around , and modern society change very rapidly owing to technological change . Thus there is no stable framework . 11 50 . The conservative are fool : They whine about the decay of traditional value , yet they enthusiastically support technological progress and economic growth . Apparently it never occurs to them that you can ’ t make rapid , drastic change in the technology and the economy of a society without causing rapid change in all other aspect of the society a well , and that such rapid change inevitably break down traditional value . 51 . The breakdown of traditional value to some extent implies the breakdown of the bond that hold together traditional small- scale social group . The disintegration of small- scale social group is also promoted by the fact that modern c onditions often require or tempt individual to move to new location , separating themselves from their community . Beyond that , a technological society ha to weaken family tie and local community if it is to function efficiently . In modern society an individual ’ s loyalty must be first to the system and only secondarily to a small- scale community , because if the internal loyalty of small- scale community were stronger than loyalty to the system , such community would pursue their own advantage at the expense of the system . 52 . Suppose that a public official or a corporation executive appoints his cousin , his friend or his co-religionist to a position rather than appointing the person best qualified for the job . He ha permitted personal loyalty to supersede his loyalty to the system , and that is “ nepotism ” or “ discrimination , ” both of which are terrible sin in modern society . Would- be industrial soc ieties that have done a poor job of subordinating personal or local loyalty to loyalty to the system are usually very inefficient . ( Look at Latin America . ) Thus an advanced industrial society can tolerate only those small -scale community that are emas culated , tamed and mad e into tool of the system.7 53 . Crowding , rapid change and the breakdown of community have been widely recognized a source of socia l problem . But we do not believe t hey are enough to account for the extent of the problem that are seen today . 54 . A few pre -industrial city were very l arge and crowded , yet their inhabitant do not seem to have suffered from psychological problem to the same extent a modern man . In America today there still are uncrowded rural area , and we find there the same problem a in urban area , though the pr oblems tend to be le acute in the rural area . Thus crowding doe not seem to be the decisive factor . 55 . On the growing edge of the American frontier duri ng the 19th century , the mobility of the population probably broke down extended family and small -scale social group to at least the same extent a these are broken down today . In fact , many nuclear family lived by choice in such isolation , having no neighbor within several mile , that they belonged to no community at all , yet they do not seem to have developed problem a a result . 56 . Furthermore , chan ge in American frontier society wa very rapid and deep . A man might be born and raised in a log cabin , outside the reach of law and order and fed largely on wild meat ; and by the time he arrived at old age he might be working at a regular job and living in an ordered community with effective law enforcement . This wa a deeper change than that which typically occurs in the life of a modern individual , yet it doe not seem to have led to psychological 12 problem . In fact , 19th century American society had a n optimistic and self -confident tone , quite unlike that of today ’ s society.8 57 . The difference , we argue , is that modern man ha the sense ( largely justified ) that change is imposed on him , whereas the 19th century frontiersman had the sense ( also largely justified ) that he created change himself , by his own choice . Thus a pioneer settled on a piece of land of his own choosing and made it into a farm through his own effort . In those day an entire county might have only a couple of hundred inhabitant and wa a far more isolated and autonomous entity than a modern county is . Hence the pioneer farmer participated a a member of a relatively small group in the creation of a new , ordered community . One may well question whether the creation of this community wa an improvement , but at any rate it satisfied the pioneer ’ s need for the power process . 58 . It would be possible to give other example of society in which there ha been rapid change and/or lack of close community tie without the kind of massive behavioral aberration that is seen in today ’ s industrial soc iety . We contend that the most important cause of social and psychological problem in modern society is the fact that people have insufficient opportunity to go through the power process in a normal way . We don ’ t mean to say that modern society is the only one in which the power process ha been disrupted . Probably most if not all civilized society have interfered with the power process to a greater or lesser extent . But in modern industrial society the problem ha become particularly acute . Leftism , at least in it recent ( mid - to late -20th century ) form , is in part a symptom of deprivation with respect to the power process . DISRUPTION OF THE POWER PROCESS IN MODERN SOCIETY 59 . We divide human drive into three group : ( 1 ) those drive that can be satisfied with minimal effort ; ( 2 ) those that can be satisfied but only at the cost of serious effort ; ( 3 ) those that can not be adequately satisfied no matter how much effort one make . The power process is the process of satisfying the drive of the second group . The more drive there are in the third group , the more there is frustration , anger , eventually defeatism , depression , etc . 60 . In modern industrial society natural human drive tend to be pushed into the first and third group , and the second group tends to consist increasingly of artificially created dri f . 61 . In primitive society , physical necessity generally fall into group 2 : They can be obtained , but only at the cost of serious effort . But modern s ociety tends to guaranty the phys ical necessity to everyone9 in exchange for only minimal effort , hence physical need are pushed into group 1 . ( There may be disagreement about whether the effort needed to hold a job is “ minimal ” ; but usually , in lower - to middle -level job , whatever effort is required is merely that of obedience . You sit or stand where you are told to sit or stand and do what you are told to do in the way you are told to do it . Seldom do you have to exert yourself seriously , and in any case you have hardly any autonomy in work , so that the need for the power process is not well served . ) 62 . Social need , such a sex , love and status , often remain in group 2 in modern society , depending on the si tuation of the individual.10 But , except for people who have a particularly 13 strong drive for status , the effort required to fulfill the social drive is insufficient to satisfy adequately the need for the power process . 63 . So certain artificial need have been created that fall into group 2 , hence serve the need for the power process . Advertising and marketing technique have been developed that make many people feel they need thing that their grandparent never desired or even dreamed of . It requires serious effort to earn enough money to satisfy these artificial need , hence they fall into group 2 . ( But see paragraph 80- 82 . ) Modern man must satisfy his need for the power process largely through pursuit of the artificial need created by the adverti sing and marketing industry ,11 and through surrogate activity . 64 . It seems that for many people , maybe the majority , these artificial form of the power process are insufficient . A theme that appears repeatedl y in the writing of the social critic of the secon d half of the 20th century is the sense of purposelessness that afflicts many people in modern society . ( This purposelessness is often called by other name such a “ anomic ” or “ middle -class vacuity . ” ) We suggest that the so -called “ identity crisis ” is ac tually a search for a sense of purpose , often for commitment to a suitable surrogate activity . It may be that existentialism is in large part a response to the purposelessness of modern life.12 Very widespread in modern society is the search for “ fulfillme nt . ” But we think that for the majority of people an activity whose main goal is fulfillment ( that is , a surrogate activity ) doe not bring completely satisfactory fulfillment . In other word , it doe not fully satisfy the need for the power process . ( Se e paragraph 41 . ) That need can be fully satisfied only through activity that have some external goal , such a physical necessity , sex , love , status , revenge , etc . 65 . Moreover , where goal are pursued through earning money , climbing the status ladder or functioning a part of the system in some other way , most people are not in a position to pursue their goal autonomously . Most worker are someone else ’ s employee and , a we pointed out in paragraph 61 , must spend their day doing what they are told to do in the way they are told to do it . Even most people who are in business for themselves have only limited autonomy . It is a chronic complaint of small -business person and entrepreneur that their hand are tied by excessive government regulation . Some of these regulation are doubtless unnecessary , but for the most part government regulation are essential and inevitable part of our extremely complex society . A large portion of small business today operates on the franchise system . It wa reported in the Wall Street Journal a few year ago that many of the franchise -granting company require applicant for franchise to take a personality test that is designed to exclude those who have creativity and initiative , because such person are not sufficiently docile to go along obediently with the franchise system . This excludes from small business many of the people who most need autonomy . 66 . Today people live more by virtue of what the system doe for them or to them than by virtue of what they do for themselves . And what they do for themselves is done more and more along channel laid down by the system . Opportunities tend to be those that the system provides , the opportunity must be exploited in accord with rule and regulation ,13 and technique prescribed by expert must be followed if there is to be a chance of success . 14 67 . Thus the power process is disrupted in our society through a deficiency of real goal and a deficiency of autonomy in the pursuit of go al . But it is also disrupted because of those human drive that fall into group 3 : the drive that one can not adequately satisfy no matter how much effort one make . One of these drive is the need for security . Our life depend on decision made by ot her people ; we have no control over these decision and usually we do not even know the people who make them . ( “ We live in a world in which relatively few people —maybe 500 or 1,000—make the important decision ” , Philip B . Heymann of Harvard Law School , quoted by Anthony Lewis , New York Times , April 21 , 1995 . ) Our life depend on whether safety standard at a nuclear power plant are properly maintained ; on how much pesticide is allowed to get into our food or how much pollution into our air ; on how skillful ( or incompetent ) our doctor is ; whether we lose or get a job may depend on decision made by government economist or corporation executive ; and so forth . Most individual are not in a position to secure themselves against these threat to more than a very limited extent . The individual ’ s search for security is therefore frustrated , which lead to a sense of powerlessness . 68 . It may be objected that primitive man is physically le secure than modern man , a is shown by his shorter life expectancy ; hence modern man suffers from le , not more than the amount of insecurity that is normal for human being . But psychological security doe not closely correspond with physical security . What make u feel secure is not so much objective security a a sense of confidence in our ability to take care of ourselves . Primitive man , threatened by a fierce animal or by hunger , can fight in self -defense or travel in s earch of food . He ha no certainty of success in these effort , but he is by no mean helpless against the thing that threaten him . The modern individual on the other hand is threatened by many thing against which he is helpless : nuclear accident , car cinogens in food , environmental pollution , war , increasing tax , invasion of his privacy by large organization , nationwide social or economic phenomenon that may disrupt his way of life . 69 . It is true that primitive man is powerless against some of the thing that threaten him ; disease for example . But he can accept the risk of disease stoically . It is part of the nature of thing , it is no one ’ s fault , unl es it is the fault of some imaginary , impersonal demon . But threat to the modern individual tend to be man -made . They are not the result of chance but are imposed on him by other person whose decision he , a an individual , is unable to influence . Consequently he feel frustrated , humiliated and angry . 70 . Thus primitive man for the most part ha his security in his own hand ( either a an individual or a a member of a small group ) whereas the security of modern man is in the hand of person or organization that are too remote or too large for him to be able personally to influence them . So modern man ’ s drive for security tends to fall into group 1 a nd 3 ; in some area ( food , shelter etc . ) his security is assured at the cost of only trivial effort , whereas in other area he can not attain security . ( The foregoing greatly simplifies the real situation , but it doe indicate in a rough , general way how t he condition of modern man differs from that of primitive man . ) 71 . People have many transitory drive or impulse that are necessarily frustrated in modern l ife , hence fall into group 3 . One may become angry , but modern society can not permit fighting . In many situation it doe not even permit verbal aggression . When going somewhere one may be in a hurry , or one may be in a mood to travel slowly , but one generally ha no choice but to move 15 with the flow of traffic and obey the traffic signal . One may want to do one ’ s work in a different way , but usually one can work only according to the rule laid down by one ’ s employer . In many other way a well , modern man is strapped down by a network of rule and regulation ( explicit or implicit ) that frustrate many of his impulse and thus interfere with the power process . Most of these regulation can not be dispensed with , because they are necessary for the functi oning of industrial society . 72 . Modern society is in certain respect extremely permissive . In matter that are irrelevant to the functioning of the system we can generally do what we please . We can believe in any religion ( a long a it doe not encourage behavior that is dangerous to the system ) . We can go to bed with anyone we like ( a long a we practice “ safe sex ” ) . We can do anything we like a long a it is unimportant . But in all important matter the system tends increasingly to regulate our behavior . 73 . Behavior is regulated not only through explici t rule and not only by the government . Control is often exercised through indirect coercion or through psychological pressure or manipulation , and by organization other than the government , or by the system a a whole . Most large organization use some form of propaganda14 to manipulate public attitude or behavior . Propaganda is not limited to “ commercial ” and advertisement , and sometimes it is not even consciously intended a propaganda by the people who make it . For instance , the content of entert ainment programming is a powerful form of propaganda . An example of indirect coercion : There is no law that say we have to go to work every day and follow our employer ’ s order . Legally there is nothing to prevent u from going to live in the wild like primitive people or from going into business for ourselves . But in practice there is very little wild country left , and there is room in the economy for only a limited number of small business owner . Hence most of u can survive only a someone else ’ s e mployee . 74 . We suggest that modern man ’ s obsession with longevity , and with maintaining physical vigor and sexual attractiveness to an advanced age , is a sym ptom of unfulfillment resulting from deprivation with respect to the power process . The “ mid -life crisis ” also is such a symptom . So is the lack of interest in having child that is fairly common in modern society but almost unheard- of in primitive soc ieties . 75 . In primitive society life is a succession of stage . The need and purpose of one stage having been fulfilled , there is no particular reluctance about passing on to the next stage . A young man go through the power process by becoming a hunter , hunting not for sport or for fulfillment but to get meat that is necessary for food . ( In young woman the process is more complex , with greater emphasi s on social power ; we won ’ t discus that here . ) This phase having been successfully passed through , the young man ha no reluctance about settling down to the responsibility of raising a family . ( In contrast , some modern people indefinitely postpone havi ng child because they are too busy seeking some kind of “ fulfillment . ” We suggest that the fulfillment they need is adequate experience of the power process —with real goal instead of the artificial goal of surrogate activity . ) Again , having successf ully raised his child , going through the power process by providing them with the physical necessity , the primitive man feel that his work is done and he is prepared to accept old age ( if he survives that long ) and death . Many modern people , on the other hand , are disturbed by the prospect of physical deterioration and death , a is shown by the amount of effort they expend trying to maintain their physical condition , appearance 16 and health . We argue that this is due to unfulfillment resulting from th e fact that they have never put their physical power to any practical use , have never gone through the power process using their body in a serious way . It is not the primitive man , who ha used his body daily for practical purpose , who fear the deter ioration of age , but the modern man , who ha never had a practical use for his body beyond walking from his car to his house . It is the man whose need for the power process ha been satisfied during his life who is best prepared to accept the end of that life . 76 . In response to the argument of this section someone will say , “ Society must find a way to give people the opportunity to go through the power proce s . ” This won ’ t work for those who need autonomy in the power process . For such people the value of the opportunity is destroyed by the very fact that society give it to them . What they need is to find or make their own opportunity . As long a the sy stem give them their opportunity it still ha them on a leash . To attain autonomy they must get off that leash . HOW SOME PEOPLE ADJUST 77 . Not everyone in industrial -technological society suffers from psychological problem . Some people even profess to be quite satisfied with society a it is . We now discus some of the reason why people differ so greatly in their response to modern society . 78 . First , there doubtless are difference in the strength of the drive for power . Individuals with a weak drive for power may have relatively little need to go through the power process , or at least relatively little need for autonomy in the power process . These are docile type who would have been happy a plantation darky in the Old South . ( We don ’ t mean to sneer at the “ plantation darky ” of the Old South . To th eir credit , most of the slave were not content with their servitude . We do sneer at people who are content with servitude . ) 79 . Some people may have some ex ceptional drive , in pursuing which they satisfy their need for the power process . For example , those who have an unusually strong drive for social status may spend their whole life climbing the status ladder without ever getting bored with that game . 80 . People vary in their susceptibility to advertising and marketing technique . Some are so susceptible that , even if they make a great deal of money , they can not satisfy their constant craving for the shiny new toy that the marketing industry dangles before their eye . So they always feel hard-pressed financially even if their income is large , and their craving are frustrated . 81 . Some people have low susceptibility to advertising and marketing technique . These are the people who aren ’ t interested in money . Material acquisition doe not serve their need for the power process . 82 . People who have medium susceptibility to advertising and marketing technique are able to earn enough money to satisfy their craving for good and service , but only at the cost of serious effort ( putting in overtime , taking a second job , earning promotion , etc . ) . Thus material acquisition serf their need for the power process . But it doe not necessarily follow that their need is full y satisfied . They may have insufficient autonomy in the power process ( their work may consist of following order ) and some of their drive may be frustrated ( e.g. , security , 17 aggression ) . ( We are guilty of oversimplification in paragraph 80 -82 because w e have assumed that the desire for material acquisition is entirely a creation of the advertising and marketing industry . Of course it ’ s not that simple . [ 11 ] 83 . Some people partly satisfy their need for power by identifying themselves with a powerful organization or mass movement . An individual lacking goal or power join a movement or an organization , adopts it goal a his own , then work toward those goal . When some of the goal are attained , the individual , even though his personal effort have played only an insignificant part in the attainment of the goal , feel ( through his identification with the movement or organization ) a if he had gone thr ough the power process . This phenomenon wa exploited by the fascist , nazi and communist . Our society us it too , though le crudely . Example : Manuel Norieg a wa an irritant to the U.S . ( goal : punish Noriega ) . The U.S . invaded Panama ( effort ) and punished Noriega ( attainment of goal ) . Thus the U.S . went through the power process and many Americans , because of thei r identification with the U.S. , experienced the power process vicariously . Hence the widespread public approval of the Panama invasion ; it gave people a sense of power.15 We see the same phenomenon in army , corporation , political party , humanitarian organization , religious or ideologic al movement . In particular , leftist movement tend to attract people who are seeking to satisfy their need for power . But for most people identification with a large organization or a mass movement doe not fully satisfy the need for power . 84 . Another way in which people satisfy their need for the power process is through surrogate activity . As we explained in paragraph 38 -40 , a surrogate activity is an activity that is directed toward an artificial goal that the individual pursues for the sake of the “ ful fillment ” that he get from pursuing the goal , not because he need to attain the goal itself . For instance , there is no practical motive for building enormous muscle , hitting a little ball into a hole or acquiring a complete series of postage stamp . Yet many people in our society devote themselves with passion to bodybuilding , golf or stamp- collecting . Some people are more “ other -directed ” than others , and therefore will more readily attach importance to a surrogate activity simply because the people around them treat it a important or because society tell them it is important . That is why some people get very serious about essentially trivial activity such a sport , or bridge , or chess , or arcane scholarly pursuit , whereas others who are more clear -sighted never see these thing a anything but the surrogate activity that they are , and consequently never attach enough importance to them to satisfy their need for the power process in that way . It only remains to point out that in many case a person ’ s way of earning a living is also a surrogate activity . Not a pure surrogate activity , since part of the motive for the activity is to gain the physical necessity and ( for some people ) social status and the luxury that advertising make them wa nt . But many people put into their work far more effort than is necessary to earn whatever money and status they require , and this extra effort constitutes a surrogate activity . This extra effort , together with the emotional investment that accompanies it , is one of the most potent force acting toward the continual development and perfecting of the system , with negative consequence for individual freedom ( see paragraph 131 ) . Especially , for the most creative scientist and engineer , work tends to be l argely a surrogate activity . This point is so important that it deserves a separate discussion , which we shall give in a moment ( paragraph 87- 92 ) . 85 . In th is section we have explained how many people in modern society do satisfy their need for the power process to a greater or lesser extent . But we think that for the majority of people the 18 need for the power process is not fully satisfied . In the first pla ce , those who have an insatiable drive for status , or who get firmly “ hooked ” on a surrogate activity , or who identify strongly enough with a movement or organization to satisfy their need for power in that way , are exceptional personality . Others are n ot fully satisfied with surrogate activity or by identification with an organization ( see paragraph 41 , 64 ) . In the second place , too much control is imposed by the system through explicit regulation or through socialization , which result in a deficiency of autonomy , and in frustration due to the impossibility of attaining certain goal and the necessity of restraining too many impulse . 86 . But even if mo st people in industrial -technological society were well satisfied , we ( FC ) would still be opposed to that form of society , because ( among other reason ) we consider it demeaning to fulfill one ’ s need for the power process through surrogate activity or through identification with an organization , rather than through pursuit of real goal . THE MOTIVES OF SCIENTISTS 87 . Science and technology provide the most im portant example of surrogate activity . Some scientist claim that they are motivated by “ curiosity ” or by a desire to “ benefit humanity . ” But it is easy to see that neither of these can be the principal motive of most scientist . As for “ curiosity , ” that notion is simply absurd . Most scientist work on highly specialized problem that are not the object of any normal curiosity . For example , is an astronomer , a mathematician or an entomologist curious about the property of isopropyltrimethylmethane ? Of course not . Only a chemist is curious about such a thing , and he is curious about it only because chemistry is his surrogate activity . Is the chemist curious about the appropriate classification of a new specie of beetle ? No . That question is of interest only to the entomologist , and he is interested in it only because entomology is his surrogate activity . If the chemist and the entomologist had to exert themselves seriously to obtain the physical necessity , and if that effort exercised their abi lities in an interesting way but in some nonscientific pursuit , then they wouldn ’ t give a damn about isopropyltrimethylmethane or the classification of beetle . Suppose that lack of fund for postgraduate education had led the chemist to become an insuran ce broker instead of a chemist . In that case he would have been very interested in insurance matter but would have cared nothing about isopropyltrimethylmethane . In any case it is not normal to put into the satisfaction of mere curiosity the amount of t ime and effort that scientist put into their work . The “ curiosity ” explanation for the scientist ’ motive just doesn ’ t stand up . 88 . The “ benefit of humanit y ” explanation doesn ’ t work any better . Some scientific work ha no conceivable relation t o the welfare of the human race—most of archaeology or comparative linguistics for example . Some other area of science present obviously dangerous possibility . Yet scientist in these area are just a enthusiastic about their work a those who develop vaccine or study air pollution . Cons ider the case of Dr . Edward Teller , who had an obvious emotional involvement in promoting nuclear power plant . Did this inv olvement stem from a desire to benefit humani ty ? If so , then why didn ’ t Dr . Teller get emotional about other “ humanitarian ” cause ? If he wa such a humanitarian then why did he help to develop the H - bomb ? As with many other scientific achievement , it is very much open to question whether nuclear power plant actually do benefit humanity . Does the cheap electricity outweigh the accumulating waste and the risk of accident ? Dr . Teller saw only one side of the question . Clearly 19 his emotional involvement wi th nuclear power arose not from a desire to “ benefit humanity ” but from a personal fulfillment he got from his work and from seeing it put to practical use . 89 . The same is true of scientist generally . With possible rare exception , their motive is neither curiosity nor a desire to benefit humanity but the need to go through the power process : to have a goal ( a scientific problem to solve ) , to make an effort ( research ) and to attain the goal ( solution of the problem . ) Science is a surrogate activity because scientist work mainly for the fulfillment they get out of the work itself . 90 . Of course , it ’ s not that simple . Other motif do play a role for many scientist . Money and status for example . Some scientist may be person of the type who have an insatiable drive for status ( see paragraph 79 ) and this may pr ovide much of the motivation for their work . No doubt the majority of scientist , like the majority of the general population , are more or le susceptible to advertising and marketing technique and need money to satisfy their craving for good and servi ce . Thus science is not a pure surrogate activity . But it is in large part a surrogate activity . 91 . Also , science and technology constitute a power ful mass movement , and many scientist gratify their need for power through identification with this mass movement ( see paragraph 83 ) . 92 . Thus science march on bl indly , without regard to the real welfare of the human race or to any other standard , obedient only to the psychological need of the scientist and of the government official and corporation executive who provide the fund for research . THE NATURE OF F REEDOM 93 . We are going to argue that industrial -technological society can not be reformed in such a way a to prevent it from progressively narrowing the sphe re of human freedom . But , because “ freedom ” is a word that can be interpreted in many way , we must first make clear what kind of freedom we are concerned with . 94 . By “ freedom ” we mean the opportunity to go through the power process , with real goal not the artificial goal of surrogate activity , and without interference , manipulation or supervision from anyone , especially from any large organization . Freedom mean being in control ( either a an individual or a a member of a small group ) of the life -and-death issue of one ’ s existence : food , clothing , shelter and defense against whatever threat there may be in one ’ s environment . Freedom mean having powe r ; not the power to control other people but the power to control the circumstance of one ’ s own life . One doe not have freedom if anyone else ( especially a large organization ) ha power over one , no matter how benevolently , tolerantly and permissively that power may be exercised . It is important not to confuse freedom with mere permissiveness ( see paragraph 72 ) . 95 . It is said that we live in a free society because we have a certain number of constitutionally guaranteed right . But these are not a important a they seem . The degree of personal freedom that exists in a society is determined more by the economic and technological structure of the society th an by it law or it form of government.16 Most of the Indian nation of New England were monarchy , and many of the city of the Italian Renaissance were controlled by 20 dictator . But in reading about these society one get the impression that they al lowed far more personal freedom than our society doe . In part this wa because they lacked efficient mechanism for enforcing the ruler ’ s will : There were no modern , well -organized police force , no rapid long - distance communication , no surveillance cam era , no dossier of information about the life of average citizen . Hence it wa relatively easy to evade control . 96 . As for our constitutional right , consider for example that of freedom of the press . We certainly don ’ t mean to knock that right ; it is very important tool for limiting concentration of political power and for keeping those who do have political power in line by publicly exposing any misbeh avior on their part . But freedom of the press is of very little use to the average citizen a an individual . The mass medium are mostly under the control of large organization that are integrated into the system . Anyone who ha a little money can have s omething printed , or can distribute it on the Internet or in some such way , but what he ha to say will be swamped by the vast volume of material put out by the medium , hence it will have no practical effect . To make an impression on society with word is therefore almost impossible for most individual and small group . Take u ( FC ) for example . If we had never done anything violent and had submitted the present writing to a publisher , they probably would not have been accepted . If they had been been accepted and published , they probably would not have attracted many reader , because it ’ s more fun to watch the entertainment put out by the medium than to read a sober essay . Even if these writing had had many reader , most of these reader would soon ha ve forgotten what they had read a their mind were flooded by the mass of material to which the medium expose them . In order to get our message before the public with some chance of making a lasting impression , we ’ ve had to kill people . 97 . Constitutional right are useful up to a point , but they do not serve to guarantee much more than what might be called the bourgeois conception of freedom . According to the bourgeois conception , a “ free ” man is essentially an element of a social machine and ha only a certain set of prescribed and delimited freedom ; freedom that are designed to serve the need of the social machine more than those of the individual . Thus the bourgeois ’ s “ free ” man ha economic freedom because that promotes growth and progress ; he ha freedom of the press because public criticism restrains misbehavior by political leader ; he ha a right to a fair trial because imprisonment at the whim of the powerful would be bad for the system . This wa clearly the attitude of Simon Bolivar . To him , people deserved liberty only if they used it to promote progress ( progress a conceived by the bourgeois ) . Other bourgeois thinker have taken a similar vi ew of freedom a a mere mean to collective end . Chester C . Tan , “ Chinese Political Thought in the Twentieth Century , ” page 202 , explains the philosophy of the Kuomintang leader Hu Han- min : “ An individual is granted right because he is a member of soci ety and his community life requires such right . By community Hu meant the whole society of the nation . ” And on page 259 Tan state that according to Carsum Chang ( Chang Chun- mai , head of the State Socialist Party in China ) freedom had to be used in the i nterest of the state and of the people a a whole . But what kind of freedom doe one have if one can use it only a someone else prescribes ? FC ’ s conception of freedom is not that of Bolivar , Hu , Chang or other bourgeois theorist . The trouble with such theorist is that they have made the development and application of social theory their surrogate activity . Consequently the theory are designed to serve the need of the theorist more than the need of any people who may be unlucky enough to live in a society on which the theory are imposed . 21 98 . One more point to be made in this section : It should not be assumed that a person ha enough freedom just be cause he say he ha enough . Freedom is restricted in part by psychological control of which people are unconscious , and moreover many people ’ s idea of what constitutes freedom are governed more by social convention than by their real need . For exampl e , it ’ s likely that many leftist of the oversocialized type would say that most people , including themselves , are socialized too little rather than too much , yet the oversocialized leftist pay a heavy psychological price for his high level of socialization . SOME PRINCIPLES OF HISTORY 99 . Think of history a being the sum of two component : an erratic component that consists of unpredictable event that follow no discernible pattern , and a regular component that consists of long-term historical trend . Here we are concerned with the long -term trend . 100 . First p rinciple . If a small change is made that affect a long -term historical trend , then the effect of that change w ill almost always be transitory —the trend will soon revert to it original state . ( Example : A reform movement designed to clean up political co rruption in a society rarely ha more than a short -term effect ; sooner or later the reformer relax and corruption creep back in . The level of political corruption in a given society tends to remain constant , or to change only slowly with the evolution of the society . Normally , a political cleanup will be permanent only if accompanied by widespread social change ; a small change in the society won ’ t be enough . ) If a small change in a long -term historical trend appears to be permanent , it is only because the change act in the direction in which the trend is already moving , so that the trend is not altered by only pushed a step ahead . 101 . The first principle is almost a tautology . If a trend were not stable with respect to small change , it would wander at random rather than following a definite direction ; in other word it would not be a long- term trend at all . 102 . Second principle . If a change is made that is sufficiently large to alter permanently a long - term historical trend , then it will alter the society a a whole . In other word , a society is a system in which all part are interrelated , and you can ’ t permanently change any important part without changing all other part a well . 103 . Third principle . If a change is made that is large enough to alter permanently a long -term trend , then the consequence for the society a a whole can not be predicted in advance . ( Unless various other society have passed through the same change and have all experienced th e same consequence , in which case one can predict on empirical ground that another society that pass through the same change will be like to experience similar consequence . ) 104 . Fourth principle . A new kind of society can not be designed on paper . That is , you can not plan out a new form of society in advance , then set it up and expect it to function a it wa designed to do . 105 . The third and fourth principle result from the complexity of human society . A change in human behavior will affect the economy of a society and it physical environment ; the ec onomy 22 will affect the environment and vice versa , and the change in the economy and the environment will affect human behavior in complex , unpredictable way ; and so forth . The network of cause and effect is far too complex to be untangled and understood . 106 . Fifth p rinciple . People do not consciously and rationally choose the form of their society . Societies develop through process of social evolution that are not under rational human control . 107 . The fifth principle is a consequence of the other four . 108 . To illustrate : By the first principle , generally speaking an attempt at social reform either act in the direction in which the society is developing anyway ( so that it merely accelerates a change that w ould have occurred in any case ) or else it ha only a transitory effect , so that the society soon slip back into it old groove . To make a lasting change in the direction of development of any important aspect of a society , reform is insufficient and rev olution is required . ( A revolution doe not necessarily involve an armed uprising or the overthrow of a government . ) By the second principle , a revolution never change only one aspect of a society , it change the whole society ; and by the third principle change occur that were never expected or desired by the revolutionary . By the fourth principle , when revolutionary or utopian set up a new kind of society , it never work out a planned . 109 . The American Revolution doe not provide a counterexample . The American “ Revolution ” wa not a revolution in our sense of the word , but a war of independence followed by a rather far - reaching political reform . The Founding Fathers did not change the direction of development of American society , nor did they aspire to do so . They only freed the development of American society from the retarding effect of British rule . Their political reform did not change any ba sic trend , but only pushed American political culture along it natural direction of development . British society , of which American society wa an offshoot , had been moving for a long time in the direction of representative democracy . And prior to the W ar of Independence the Americans were already practicing a significant degree of representative democracy in the colonial assembly . The political system established by the Constitution wa modeled on the British system and on the colonial assembly . With major alteration , to be sure —there is no doubt that the Founding Fathers took a very important step . But it wa a step along the road that English - speaking world wa already traveling . The proof is that Britain and all of it colony that were popul ated predominantly by people of British descent ended up with system of representative democracy essentially similar to that of the United States . If the Founding Fathers had lost their nerve and declined to sign the Declaratio n of Independence , our way of li fe today would not have been significantly different . Maybe we would have had somewhat closer tie to Britain , and would have had a Parliament and Prime Minister instead of a Congress and President . No big deal . Thus the American Revolution provide s not a counterexample to our principle but a good illustration of them . 110 . Still , one ha to use common sense in applying the principle . They are expressed in imprecise language that allows latitude for interpretation , and exception to them can be found . So we present these principle not a inviolable law but a rule of thumb , or guide to thinking , that may provide a partial antidote to naive idea about the future of society . The principle should be 23 borne constantly in mind , and whenever one reach a conc lusion that conflict with them one should carefully reexamine one ’ s thinking and retain the conclusion only if one ha good , solid reason fo r doing so . INDUSTRIAL -TECHNOLOGICAL SOCIETY CAN NOT BE REFORMED 111 . The foregoing principle help to show how hopelessly difficult it would be to reform the industrial system in such a way a to prevent it from progressively narrowing our sphere of freedom . There ha been a consistent tendency , going back at least to the Industrial Revolution , for technolog y to strengthen the system at a high cost in individual freedom and local autonomy . Hence any change designed to protect freedom from technology would be contrary to a fundamental trend in the development of our society . Consequently , such a change eit her would be a transitory one —soon swamped by the tide of history —or , if large enough to be permanent would alter the nature of our whole society . This by the first and second principle . Moreover , since society would be altered in a way that could not be predicted in advance ( third principle ) there would be great risk . Changes large enough to make a lasting difference in favor of freedom would not be initiated because it would be realized that they would gravely disrupt the system . So any attempt at ref orm would be too timid to be effective . Even if change large enough to make a lasting difference were initiated , they would be retracted when their disruptive effect became apparent . Thus , permanent change in favor of freedom could be brought about only by person prepared to accept radical , dangerous and unpredictable alteration of the entire system . In other word by revolutionary , not reformer . 112 . People anxious to rescue freedom without sacrificing the supposed benefit of technology will suggest naive scheme for some new form of society that would reconcile freedom with technology . Apart from the fact that people who make such suggestion seldom propose any practical mean by which the new form of society could be set up in the first place , it follows from the fourth principle that even if the new form of society could be once established , it either would collapse or would give result very dif ferent from those expected . 113 . So even on very general ground it seems highly improbable that any way of changing society could be found that would reconc ile freedom with modern technology . In the next few section we will give more specific reason for concluding that freedom and technological progress are incompatible . RESTRICTION OF FREEDOM IS UNAVOIDABLE IN INDUSTRIAL SOCIETY 114 . As explained in paragraph 65- 67 , 70 -73 , modern man is strapped down by a network of rule and regulation , and his fate depends on the action of person remote from him whose decision he can not influence . This is not accidental or a result of the arbitrariness of arrogant bureaucrat . It is necessary and inevitable in any technologically advanced society . The system ha to regulate human behavior closely in order to function . At work people have to do what they are told to do , otherwise production would be thrown into chaos . Bureaucracies have to be run according to rigid rule . To allow any substantial personal discretion to lower -level bureaucrat would disrupt the syste m and lead to charge of unfairness due to difference in the way individual bureaucrat exercised their discretion . It is true that some restriction on our freedom could be 24 eliminated , but generally speaking the regulation of our life by large organiza tions is necessary for the functioning of industrial -technological society . The result is a sense of powerlessness on the part of the average person . It may be , however , that formal regulation will tend increasingly to be replaced by psychological tool that make u want to do what the system requires of u . ( Propaganda [ 14 ] , educational technique , “ mental health ” program , etc . ) 115 . The system ha to force people to behave in way that are increasingly remote from the natural pattern of human behavior . For example , the system need scientist , mathematician and engineer . It can ’ t function without them . So heavy pressure is put on child to excel i n these field . It isn ’ t natural for an adolescent human being to spend the bulk of his time sitting at a desk absorbed in study . A normal adolescent want to spend his time in active contact with the real world . Among primitive people the thing that child are trained to do tend to be in reasonable harmony with natural human impulse . Among the American Indians , for example , boy were trained in active outdoor pursuit —just the sort of thing that boy like . But in our society child are pushed i nto studying technical subject , which most do grudgingly . 116 . Because of the constant pressure that the system exerts to modify human behavior , there is a gradual increase in the number of people who can not or will not adjust to society ’ s requirement : welfare leech , youth gang member , cultist , anti -government rebel , radical environmentalist saboteur , dropout and resister of various kind . 117 . In any technologically advanced society the individual ’ s fate must depend on decision that he personally can not influence to any great extent . A technological s ociety can not be broken down into small , autonomous community , because production depends on the cooperation of very large number of people and machine . Such a society must be highly organized and decision have to be made that affect very large numbe r of people . When a decision affect , say , a million people , then each of the affected individual ha , on the average , only a one -millionth share in making the decision . What usually happens in practice is that decision are made by public official or corporation executive , or by technical specialist , but even when the public vote on a decision the number of voter ordinarily is too large for the vote of any one individual to be signifi cant.17 Thus most individual are unable to influence measurably the major decision that affect their life . There is no conceivable way to remedy this in a technologically advanced society . The system try to “ solve ” this problem by using propaganda to make people want the decision that have been made for them , but even if this “ solution ” were completely successful in making people feel better , it would be demeaning . 118 . Conservatives and some others advocate more “ l ocal autonomy . ” Local community once did have autonomy , but such autonomy becomes le and le possible a local community become more enmeshed with and dependent on large -scale system like public utility , computer network , highway system , the ma s communication medium , the modern health care system . Also operating against autonomy is the fact that technology applied in one location often affect people at other location far way . Thus pesticide or chemical use near a creek may contaminate the w ater supply hundred of mile downstream , and the greenhouse effect affect the whole world . 25 119 . The system doe not and can not exist to satisfy human need . Instead , it is human behavior that ha to be modified to fit the need of the system . This ha nothing to do with the political or social ideology that may pretend to guide the technological system . It is not the fault of capitalism and it is not the fault of socialism . It is the fault of technology , because the system is guided not by ideolo gy but by technical necessity.18 Of course the system doe satisfy many human need , but generally speaking it doe this only to the extent that it is to the adv antage of the system to do it . It is the need of the system that are paramount , not those of the human being . For example , the system provides people with food because the system couldn ’ t function if everyone starved ; it attends to people ’ s psychologica l need whenever it can conveniently do so , because it couldn ’ t function if too many people became depressed or rebellious . But the system , for good , solid , practical reason , must exert constant pressure on people to mold their behavior to the need of t he system . To much waste accumulating ? The government , the medium , the educational system , environmentalist , everyone inundates u with a mass of propaganda about recycling . Need more technical personnel ? A chorus of voice exhorts kid to study science . No one stop to ask whether it is inhumane to force adolescent to spend the bulk of their time studying subject most of them hate . When skilled worker are put out of a job by technical advance and have to undergo “ retraining , ” no one asks whether it is humiliating for them to be pushed around in this way . It is simply taken for granted that everyone must bow to technical necessity . and for good reason : If human need were put before technical necessity there would be economic problem , unemployment , shortage or worse . The concept of “ mental health ” in our society is defined largely by the extent to which an individual behaves in accord with the need of the system and doe so without showing sign of stress . 120 . Efforts to make room for a sense of purpose and for autonomy within the system are no better than a joke . For example , one company , instead of having each of it employee assemble only one section of a catalogue , had each assemble a whole catalogue , and this wa supposed to give them a sense of purpose and achievement . Some company have tried to give their employee more autonomy in their work , but for practical reason this usually can be done only to a very limited extent , and in any case employee are never given autonomy a to ultimate goal —their “ autonomous ” effort can never be directed toward goal that they select personally , but only toward their employer ’ s goal , such a the sur vival and growth of the company . Any company would soon go out of business if it permitted it employee to act otherwise . Similarly , in any enterprise within a socialist system , worker must direct their effort toward the goal of the enterprise , other wise the enterprise will not serve it purpose a part of the system . Once again , for purely technical reason it is not possible for most individual or small group to have much autonomy in industrial society . Even the small -business owner commonly ha only limited autonomy . Apart from the necessity of government regulation , he is restricted by the fact that he must fit into the economic system and conform to it requirement . For instance , when someone develops a new technology , the small -business person often ha to use that technology whether he want to or not , in order to remain competitive . THE ‘ BAD ’ PARTS OF TECHNOLOGY CAN NOT BE SEPARATED FROM THE ‘ GOOD ’ 121 . A further reason why industrial society can not be reformed in favor of freedom is that modern technology is a unified system in which all part are dependent on one anothe r . You can ’ t get rid 26 of the “ bad ” part of technology and retain only the “ good ” part . Take modern medicine , for example . Progress in medical science depends on progress in chemistry , physic , biology , computer science and other field . Advanced medic al treatment require expensive , high- tech equipment that can be made available only by a technologically progressive , economically rich society . Clearly you can ’ t have much Progress in medicine without the whole technological system and everything that g oes with it . 122 . Even if medical progress could be maintained without the rest of the technological system , it would by itself bring certain evil . Suppose for example that a cure for diabetes is discovered . People with a genetic tendency to diabetes will then be able to survive and reproduce a well a anyone else . Natural selection against gene for diabetes will cease and such gene will spread throughout the population . ( This may be occurring to some extent already , since diabetes , while not curable , can be controlled through use of insulin . ) The same thing will happen with many other disease susceptibility to which is affected by genetic degradation of the population . The only solution will be some sort of eugenics program or extensive genetic engineering of human being , so that man in the future will no longer be a creation of nature , or of chance , or of God ( depending on your religious or philosophical opinion ) , but a manufactured product . 123 . If you think that big government interferes in your life too much now , just wait till the government start regulating the genetic constitution of your child . Such regulation will inevitably follow the introduction of genetic engineering of human being , because the consequence of unregulated genetic engine ering would be disastrous.19 124 . The usual response to such concern is to talk about “ medical ethic . ” But a code of ethic would not serve to protect freedom in the face of medical progress ; it would only make matter worse . A code of ethic applicable to genetic engineering would be in effect a mean of regulating the genetic constitution of human being . Somebody ( probably the upper -middle class , mostly ) would decide that such and such application of g enetic engineering were “ ethical ” and others were not , so that in effect they would be imposing their own value on the genetic constitution of the population at large . Even if a code of ethic were chosen on a completely democratic basis , the majority w ould be imposing their own value on any minority who might have a different idea of what constituted an “ ethical ” use of genetic engineering . The only code of ethic that would truly protect freedom would be one that prohibited any genetic engineering of human being , and you can be sure that no such code will ever be applied in a technological society . No code that reduced genetic engineering to a minor role could stand up for long , because the temptation presented by the immense power of biotechnolog y would be irresistible , especially since to the majority of people many of it application will seem obviously and unequivocally good ( eliminating physical and mental disease , giving people the ability they need to get along in today ’ s world ) . Inevit ably , genetic engineering will be used extensively , but only in way consistent with the need of the indust rial-technological system.20 TECHNOLOGY IS A MORE POWERFUL SOCIAL FORCE THAN THE ASPIRATION FOR FREEDOOM 125 . It is not possible to make a lasting compromise between technology and freedom , because technology is by far the more powerful social force and continually encroaches on freedom through 27 repeated compromise . Imagine the case of two neighbor , each of whom at the outset owns the same amount of land , but one of whom is more powerful than the other . The powerful one demand a piece of the other ’ s land . The weak one refuse . The powerful one say , “ OK , let ’ s compromise . Give me half of what I asked . ” The weak one ha litt le choice but to give in . Some time later the powerful neighbor demand another piece of land , again there is a compromise , and so forth . By forcing a long series of compromise on the weaker man , the powerful one eventually get all of his land . So it go in the conflict between technology and freedom . 126 . Let u explain why tech nology is a more powerful social force than the aspiration for freedom . 127 . A technological advance that appears not to threaten freedom often turn out to threaten it very seriously later on . For example , consider motorized transport . A walking man formerly could go where he pleased , go at his own pace without observing any traffic regulation , and wa independent of technological support -systems . When motor vehicle were introduced they appeared to increase man ’ s freedom . They took no freedom away from the walking man , no one had to have an automobile if he didn ’ t want one , and anyone who did choose to buy an automobile could travel much faster and farther than a walking man . But the introduction of motorized transport soon changed society in such a way a to restrict greatly man ’ s freedom of locomotion . When automobile became numerous , it became necessary to regulate their use extensively . In a car , especially in densely populated area , one can not just go where one like at one ’ s own pace ; one ’ s movement is governed by the flow of traffic and by various traffic law . One is tied down by various obligation : license requirement , driver test , re newin g registration , insurance , maintenance required for safety , monthly payment on purchase price . Moreover , the use of motorized transport is no longer optional . Since the introduction of motorized transport the arrangement of our city ha changed in suc h a way that the majority of people no longer live within walking distance of their place of employment , shopping area and recreational opportunity , so that they have to depend on the automobile for transportation . Or else they must use public transpor tation , in which case they have even le control over their own movement than when driving a car . Even the walker ’ s freedom is now greatly restricted . In the city he continually ha to stop to wait for traffic light that are designed mainly to serve au to traffic . In the country , motor traffic make it dangerous and unpleasant to walk along the highway . ( Note this important point that we have just illustrated with the case of motorized transport : When a new item of technology is introduced a an option that an individual can accept or not a he chooses , it doe not necessarily remain optional . In many case the new technology change society in such a way that people eventually find themselves forced to use it . ) 128 . While technological progress a a whole continually narrow our sphere of freedom , each new technical advance considered by itself appears to be desirable . Electricity , indoor plumbing , rapid long-distance communications… how could one argue against any of these thing , or against any other of the innumerable technical advance that have made modern society ? It would have been absurd to resist the introduction of the telephone , for example . It offered many advantage and no disadvantage . Yet , a we explained in paragraph 59- 76 , all these technical advance taken together have created a world in which the average man ’ s fate is no longer in his own hand or in the hand of his neighbor and f riends , but in those of politician , corporation executive and remote , anonymous technician and bureaucrat whom he a an individual ha no power to 28 influence.21 The same process will continue in the future . Take genetic engineering , for example . Few pe ople will resist the introduction of a genetic technique that eliminates a hereditary disease . It doe no apparent harm and prevents much suffering . Yet a large number of genetic improvement taken together will make the human being into an engineered p roduct rather than a free creation of chance ( or of God , or whatever , depending on your religious belief ) . 129 . Another reason why technology is such a powe rful social force is that , within the context of a given society , technological progress march in only one direction ; it can never be reversed . Once a technical innovation ha been introduced , people usually become dependent on it , so that they can neve r again do without it , unless it is replaced by some still more advanced innovation . Not only do people become dependent a individual on a new item of technology , but , even more , the system a a whole becomes dependent on it . ( Imagine what would happen to the system today if computer , for example , were eliminated . ) Thus the system can move in only one direction , toward greater technologization . Technology repeatedly force freedom to take a step back , but technology can never take a step back —short of the overthrow of the whole technological system . 130 . Technol ogy advance with great rapidity and threatens freedom at many different point at the same time ( crowding , rule and regulation , increasing dependence of individual on large organization , propaganda and other psychological technique , genetic engineering , invasion of privacy through surveillance device and computer , etc . ) . To hold back any one of the threat to freedom would require a long and difficult social struggle . Those who want to protect freedom are overwhelmed by the sheer number of new attack and the rapidity with which they develop , hence they become apathetic and no longer resist . To fight each of the threat separately would be futile . Success can be hoped for only by fighting the technological system a a whole ; but that is revolution , not reform . 131 . Technicians ( we use this term in it broad sense to describe all those who perform a specialized task that requires training ) tend to be so involved in their work ( their surrogate activity ) that when a conflict arises between their technical work and freedom , they almost always decide in favor of their technical work . This is obvious in the case of scientist , but it also appears elsewhere : educator , humanitarian group , conservation organization do not hesitate to use propaganda or other psychological technique to help them achieve their laudable end . Corporations and government agency , when they find it useful , do not hesitate to collect information about individual without regard to their privacy . Law enforcement agency are frequently inconvenienced by the constitutional right of suspect and often of completely innocent person , and they do whatever they can do legally ( or sometimes illegally ) to restrict or circumvent those right . Most of these educator , gover nment official and law officer believe in freedom , privacy and constitutional right , but when these conflict with their work , they usually feel that their work is more important . 132 . It is well known that people generally work better and more persistently when striving for a reward than when attempting to avoid a punishment or negative outcome . Scientists and other technician are motivated mainly by the reward they get through their work . But those who oppose technological invasion of freedom are working to avoid a negative outcome , consequently there are few who work persistently and well at this discouraging task . If reformer ever achieved 29 a single victory that seemed to set up a solid barrier against further erosion of freedom through technical progress , most would tend to relax and turn their attention to more agreeable pursuit . But the scientist would remain busy in their laboratory , and technology a it progress would find way , in spite of any barrier , to exert more and more control over individual and make them always more dependent on the system . 133 . No social arrangement , whether law , institution , custom or ethical code , can provide permanent protection against technology . History show that all social arrangement are transitory ; they all change or break down eventually . But technological advance are permanent within the context of a given civilization . Suppose for example that it were possible to arrive at some social arrangement that would prevent genetic engineering from being applied to human being , or prevent it from being applied in such a way a to threaten freedom and dignity . Still , the technology would remain waiting . Sooner or later the social arrangement would break down . Probably sooner , given the pace of change in our society . Then genetic engineering woul d begin to invade our sphere of freedom , and this invasion would be irreversible ( short of a breakdown of technological civilization itself ) . Any illusion about achieving anything permanent through social arrangement should be dispelled by what is curre ntly happening with environmental legislation . A few year ago it seemed that there were secure legal barrier preventing at least some of the worst form of environmental degradation . A change in the political wind , and those barrier begin to crumble . 134 . For all of the foregoing reason , technology is a more powerful social force than the aspiration for freedom . But this statement requires an important qualification . It appears that during the next several decade the industrial -technological system will be undergoing severe stress due to economic and environmental problem , and especially due to problem of human behavior ( alienation , rebellion , ho tility , a variety of social and psychological difficulty ) . We hope that the stress through which the system is likely to pas will cause it to break down , or at least will weaken it sufficiently so that a revolution against it becomes possible . If su ch a revolution occurs and is successful , then at that particular moment the aspiration for freedom will have proved more powerful than technology . 135 . In paragraph 125 we used an analogy of a weak neighbor who is left destitute by a strong neighbor who take all his land by forcing on him a series of compromise . But suppose now that the strong neighbor get sick , so tha t he is unable to defend himself . The weak neighbor can force the strong one to give him his land back , or he can kill him . If he let the strong man survive and only force him to give the land back , he is a fool , because when the strong man get well he will again take all the land for hi mself . The only sensible alternative for the weaker man is to kill the strong one while he ha the chance . In the same way , while the industrial system is sick we must destroy it . If we compromise with it and let it recover from it sickness , it will ev entually wipe out all of our freedom . SIMPLER SOCIAL PROBLEMS HAVE PROVED INTRACTABLE 136 . If anyone still imago that it would be possible to reform the s ystem in such a way a to protect freedom from technology , let him consider how clumsily and for the most part unsuccessfully our society ha dealt with other social problem that are far more simple and 30 straightforward . Among other thing , the system ha failed to stop environmental degradation , political corruption , drug trafficking or domestic abuse . 137 . Take our environmental problem , for example . Here the conflict of value is straightforward : economic expedience now versus saving some of our natural resour ce for our grandchildren.22 But on this subject we get only a lot of blather and obfuscation from the people who have power , and nothing like a clea r , consistent line of action , and we keep on piling up environmental problem that our grandchild will have to live with . Attempts to resolve the environmental issue consist of struggle and compromise between different faction , some of which are ascendant at one moment , others at another moment . The line of struggle change with the shifting current of public opinion . This is not a rational process , nor is it one that is likely to lead to a timely and successful solution to the problem . Major soc ial problem , if they get “ solved ” at all , are rarely or never solved through any rational , comprehensive plan . They just work themselves out through a process in which various competing group pursuing their own ( usuall y short -term ) self -interest23 arrive ( mainly by luck ) at some more or le stable modus vivendi . In fact , the principle we formulated in paragraph 100- 106 make it seem doubtful that rational long - term social planning can ever be successful . 138 . Thus it is clear that the human race ha at best a very limited capacity for solving even relatively straightforward social problem . How then is it going to solve the far more difficult and subtle problem of reconciling freedom with technology ? Technology present clear -cut material advantage , whereas freedom is an abstraction that mean different thing to different people and it loss is easily obscured by propaganda and fancy talk . 139 . And note this important difference : It is conceivable that our environmental problem ( for example ) may some day be settled through a rational , comprehensive plan , but if this happens it will be only because it is in the long -term interest of the system to solve these problem . But it is not in the interest of the system to preserve freedom or small- group autonomy . On the contrary , it is in the interest of the system to bring human behavior under control to the greatest possible extent.24 Thus , while practical consideration may eventually force the system to take a rational , prudent approach to environmental problem , equally practical consideration will force the system to regulate human behavior ever more closely ( preferably by indirect mean that will disguise the encroachment on freedom ) . This isn ’ t just our opinion . Eminent social scientist ( e.g . James Q . Wilson ) have stressed the importance of “ socializin g ” people more effectively . REVOLUTION IS EASIER THAN REFORM 140 . We hope we have convinced the reader that the system can not be reformed in such a way a to reconcile freedom with technology . The only way out is to dispense with the industrial - technological system altogether . This implies revolution , not necessarily an armed uprising , but certainly a radical and fundamental change in the nature of society . 141 . People tend to assume that because a revolution involves a much greater change than reform doe , it is more difficult to bring about than reform is . Actually , under certain circumstance revolution is much easier than reform . The reason is that a revolutionary movement can inspire an intensity of commitment that a reform movement can not inspire . A reform movement merely 31 offer to solve a particular soc ial problem . A revolutionary movement offer to solve all problem at one stroke and create a whole new world ; it provides the kind of ideal for which people will take great risk and make great sacrifice . For this reason it would be much easier to ove rthrow the whole technological system than to put effective , permanent restraint on the development or application of any one segment of technology , such a genetic engineering , for example . Not many people will devote themselves with single -minded passi on to imposing and maintaining restraint on genetic engineering , but under suitable condition large number of people may devote themselves passionately to a revolution against the industrial -technological system . As we noted in paragraph 132 , reformer seeking to limit certain aspect of technology would be working to avoid a negative outcome . But revolutionary work to gain a powerful reward— fulfillment of their revolutionary vision —and therefore work harder and more persistently than reformer do . 142 . Reform is always restrained by the fear of painful consequence if change go too far . But once a revolutionary fever ha taken hold of a society , peopl e are willing to undergo unlimited hardship for the sake of their revolution . This wa clearly shown in the French and Russian Revolutions . It may be that in such case only a minority of the population is really committed to the revolution , but this mi nority is sufficiently large and active so that it becomes the dominant force in society . We will have more to say about revolution in paragraph 180- 205 . CONTROL OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR 143 . Since the beginning of civilization , organized society have had to put pressure on human being for the sake of the functioning of the social organism . The kind of pressure vary greatly from one society to another . Some of the pressure are physical ( poor diet , excessive labor , environmental pollution ) , some are psychological ( noise , crowding , forcing human behavior into the mold that society requires ) . In the past , human nature ha been approximately constant , or at any rate ha varied only within certain bound . Consequently , society have been able to push people only up to certain limit . When the limit of human endurance ha been passed , thing start going wrong : rebellion , or crime , or corruption , or evasion of work , or depression and other mental problem , or an elevated death rate , or a declining birth rate or something else , so that either the society break down , or it functioning becomes too inefficient and it is ( quickly or gradually , through conquest , attrition or evolution ) replaced by some more efficient form of society.25 144 . Thus human nature ha in the past put certain limit on the development of soc ieties . People could be pushed only so far and no farther . But today this may be changing , because modern technology is developing way of modifying human being . 145 . Imagine a society that subject people to condition that make them terribly unhappy , then give them drug to take away their unhappiness . Science fiction ? It is already happening to some extent in our own society . It is well known that the rate of clinical depression ha been greatly increasing in recent decade . We believe that this is due to disruption of the power process , a explained in paragraph 59- 76 . But even if we are wrong , the increasing rate of depression is certainly the resu lt of some condition that exist in today ’ s society . Instead of removing the condition that make people depressed , modern society give them antidepressant drug . In effect , antidepressant are a mean of modifying an individual ’ s internal state in such a way a to enable him to tolerate social condition that he would otherwise find intolerable . ( Yes , we know that 32 depression is often of purely genetic origin . We are referring here to those case in which environment play the predominant role . ) 146 . Drugs that affect the mind are only one example of the new method of controlling human behavior that modern society is developing . Let u look at some of the other method . 147 . To start with , there are the technique of surveillance . Hidden video camera are now used in most store and in many other place , computer are used to collect and process vast amount of information about individual . Information so obtained greatly increase the effectiveness of physical coercio n ( i.e. , law enforcement ) .26 Then there are the method of propaganda , for which the mass communication medium p rovide effective vehicle . Efficient technique have been developed for winning election , selling product , influencing public opinion . The entertainment industry serf a an important psychological tool of the system , possibly eve n when it is dishing out large amount of sex and violence . Entertainment provides modern man with an essential mean of escape . While absorbed in television , video , etc. , he can forget stress , anxiety , frustration , dissatisfaction . Many primitive peop le , when they don ’ t have work to do , are quite content to sit for hour at a time doing nothing at all , because they are at peace with themselves and their world . But most modern people must be constantly occupied or entertained , otherwise they get “ bore d , ” i.e. , they get fidgety , uneasy , irritable . 148 . Other technique strike deeper than the foregoing . Education is no longer a simple affair of paddling a kid ’ s behind when he doesn ’ t know his lesson and patting him on the head when he doe know them . It is becoming a scientific technique for controlling the child ’ s development . Sylvan Learning Centers , for example , have had great success in motivating child to study , and psychological technique are also used with more or le success in many conventional school . “ Parenting ” technique that are taught to parent are designed to make child accept fundamental value of the system and behave in way t hat the system find desirable . “ Mental health ” program , “ intervention ” technique , psychotherapy and so forth are ostensibly designed to benefit individual , but in practice they usually serve a method for inducing individual to think and behave a the system requires . ( There is no contradiction here ; an individual whose attitude or behavior bring him into conflict with the system is up against a force that is too powerful for him to conquer or escape from , hence he is likely to suffer from stress , f rustration , defeat . His path will be much easier if he think and behaves a the system requires . In that sense the system is acting for the benefit of the individual when it brainwashes him into conformity . ) Child abuse in it gross and obvious form is disapproved in most if not all culture . Tormenting a child for a trivial reason or no reason at all is something that appalls almost everyone . But many psychologist interpret the concept of abuse much more broadly . Is spanking , when used a part of a rational and consistent system of discipline , a form of abuse ? The question will ultimately be decided by whether or not spanking tends to produce behavior that make a person fit in well with the existing system of society . In practice , the word “ abuse ” tends to be interpreted to include any method of child- rearing that produce behavior inconvenient for the system . Thus , when they go beyond the prevention of obvious , senseless cruelty , program for preventing “ child abuse ” are directed toward the contr ol of human behavior on behalf of the system . 33 149 . Presumably , research will continue to increase the effectiveness of psychological technique for controlli ng human behavior . But we think it is unlikely that psychological technique alone will be sufficient to adjust human being to the kind of society that technology is creating . Biological method probably will have to be used . We have already mentioned the use of drug in this connection . Neurology may provide other avenue for modifying the human mind . Genetic engineering of human being is already beginning to occur in the form of “ gene therapy , ” and there is no reason to assume that such method wil l not eventually be used to modify those aspect of the body that affect mental functioning . 150 . As we mentioned in paragraph 134 , industrial society seems likely to be entering a period of severe stress , due in part to problem of human behavior and in part to economic and environmental problem . And a considerable proportion of the system ’ s economic and environmental problem result from the way human bein g behave . Alienation , low self -esteem , depression , hostility , rebellion ; child who won ’ t study , youth gang , illegal drug use , rape , child abuse , other crime , unsafe sex , teen pregnancy , population growth , political corruption , race hatred , ethnic ri valry , bitter ideological conflict ( e.g. , pro- choice v . pro-life ) , political extremism , terrorism , sabotage , anti -government group , hate group . All these threaten the very survival of the system . The system will therefore be forced to use every pract ical mean of controlling human behavior . 151 . The social disruption that we see today is certainly not the result of mere chance . It can only be a result o f the condition of life that the system imposes on people . ( We have argued that the most important of these condition is disruption of the power process . ) If the system succeeds in imposing sufficient control over human behavior to assure it own survi val , a new watershed in human history will have been passed . Whereas formerly the limit of human endurance have imposed limit on the development of society ( a we explained in Paragraphs 143 , 144 ) , industrial -technological society will be able to pas those limit by modifying human being , whether by psychological method or biological method or both . In the future , social system will not be adjusted to suit the need of human being . Instead , human being will be adjusted to suit the need of the system.27 152 . Generally speaking , technological control over human behavior will probably not be introduced with a totalitarian intention or even through a c onscious desire to restrict human freedom.28 Each new step in the assertion of control over the human mind will be taken a a rational response to a problem that face society , such a curing alcoholism , reducing the crime rate or inducing young people to s tudy science and engineering . In many case there will be a humanitarian justification . For example , when a psychiatrist prescribes an anti -depressant for a depressed patient , he is clearly doing that individual a favor . It would be inhumane to withhold the drug from someone who need it . When Parents send their child to Sylvan Learning Centers to have them manipulated into becoming enthusiastic about their study , they do so from concern for their child ’ s welfare . It may be that some of these p arents wish that one didn ’ t have to have specialized training to get a job and that their kid didn ’ t have to be brainwashed into becoming a computer nerd . But what can they do ? They can ’ t change society , and their child may be unemployable if he doesn ’ t have certain skill . So they send him to Sylvan . 34 153 . Thus control over human behavior will be introduced not by a calculated decision of the authority but through a process of social evolution ( rapid evolution , however ) . The process will be impossible to resist , because each advance , considered by itself , will appear to be beneficial , or at least the evil involved in making the advance will appear to be be neficial , or at least the evil involved in making the advance will seem to be le than that which would result from not making it ( see paragraph 127 ) . Propaganda for example is used for many good purpose , such a discouraging child abuse or race hatred . [ 14 ] Sex education is obviously useful , yet the effect of sex education ( to the extent that it is successful ) is to take the shaping of sexual attitude away from the family and put it into the hand of the state a represented by the public school syste m . 154 . Suppose a biological trait is discovered that increase the likelihood that a child will grow up to be a criminal , and suppose some sort of gene ther apy can remove this trait.29 Of course most parent whose child posse the trait will have them undergo the therapy . It would be inhumane to do otherwise , since the child would probably have a miserable life if he grew up to be a criminal . But many or most primitive society have a low crime rate in comparison with that of our society , even though they have neither high- tech method of child- rearing nor harsh system of punishment . Since there is no reason to suppose that more modern men than primiti ve men have innate predatory tendency , the high crime rate of our society must be due to the pressure that modern condition put on people , to which many can not or will not adjust . Thus a treatment designed to remove potential criminal tendency is at least in part a way of re- engineering people so that they suit the requirement of the system . 155 . Our society tends to regard a a “ sickness ” any mode of thought or behavior that is inconvenient for the system , and this is plausible because when an individual doesn ’ t fit into the system it cause pain to the individual a well a problem for the system . Thus the manipulation of an individual to adjust him to the system is seen a a “ cure ” for a “ sickness ” and therefore a good . 156 . In paragraph 127 we pointed out that if the use of a new item of technology i s initially optional , it doe not necessarily remain optional , because the new technology tends to change society in such a way that it becomes difficult or impossible for an individual to function without using that technology . This applies also to the t echnology of human behavior . In a world in which most child are put through a program to make them enthusiastic about studying , a parent will almost be forced to put his kid through such a program , because if he doe not , then the kid will grow up to be , comparatively speaking , an ignoramus and therefore unemployable . Or suppose a biological treatment is discovered that , without undesirable side -effects , will greatly reduce the psychological stress from which so many people suffer in our society . If large number of people choose to undergo the treatment , then the general level of stress in society will be reduced , so that it will be possible for the system to increase the stress -producing pressure . This will lead more people to undergo the treatment ; and so forth , so that eventually the pressure may become so heavy that few people will be able to survive without undergoing the stress -reducing treatment . In fact , something like this seems to have happened already with one of our society ’ s most impor tant psychological tool for enabling people to reduce ( or at least temporarily escape from ) stress , namely , mass entertainment ( see paragraph 147 ) . Our use of mass entertainment is “ optional ” : No law requires u to watch television , listen to the radio , read magazine . Yet mass entertainment is a mean of escape and stress -reduction on which most of u have become dependent . Everyone 35 complains about the trashiness of television , but almost everyone watch it . A few have kicked the TV habit , but it would be a rare person who could get along today without using any form of mass entertainment . ( Yet until quite recently in human histor y most people got along very nicely with no other entertainment than that which each local community created for itself . ) Without the entertainment industry the system probably would not have been able to get away with putting a much stress -producing pressure on u a it doe . 157 . Assuming that industrial society survives , it is likely that technology will eventually acquire something approaching complete control over human behavior . It ha been established beyond any rational doubt that human thought and behavior have a large ly biological basis . As experimenter have demonstrated , feeling such a hunger , pleasure , anger and fear can be turned on and off by electrical stimulation of appropriate part of the brain . Memories can be destroyed by damaging part of the brain or t hey can be brought to the surface by electrical stimulation . Hallucinations can be induced or mood changed by drug . There may or may not be an immaterial human soul , but if there is one it clearly is le powerful that the biological mechanism of huma n behavior . For if that were not the case then researcher would not be able so easily to manipulate human feeling and behavior with drug and electrical current . 158 . It presumably would be impractical for all people to have electrode inserted in their head so that they could be controlled by the authority . But the fact that human thought and feeling are so open to biological intervention show that the problem of controlling human behavior is mainly a technical problem ; a problem of neuron , hormone and complex molecule ; the kind of problem that is accessible to scientific attack . Given the outstanding record of our society in solving technical problem , it is overwhelmingly probable that great advance will be made in the control of human behavior . 159 . Will public resistance prevent the introduction of technological control of human behavior ? It certainly would if an attempt were made to introduce such control all at once . But since technological control will be introduced through a long sequence of small advance , there will be no rational and eff ective public resistance . ( See paragraph 127 , 132 , 153 . ) 160 . To those who think that all this sound like science fiction , we point out that yesterday ’ s science fiction is today ’ s fact . The Industrial Revolution ha radically altered man ’ s environment and way of life , and it is only to be expected that a technology is increasingly applied to the human body and mind , man himself will be altered a radicall y a his environment and way of life have been . HUMAN RACE AT A CROSSROADS 161 . But we have gotten ahead of our story . It is one thing to develop in the laboratory a series of psychological or biological technique for manipulating human behavior and quite another to integrate these technique into a functioning social system . The latter problem is the more difficult of the two . For example , while the techn iques of educational psychology doubtless work quite well in the “ lab school ” where they are developed , it is not necessarily easy to apply them effectively throughout our educational system . We all know what many of our school are like . The teacher a re too busy taking knife and gun away from the kid to subject them to the 36 latest technique for making them into computer nerd . Thus , in spite of all it technical advance relating to human behavior , the system to date ha not been impressively succe ssful in controlling human being . The people whose behavior is fairly well under the control of the system are those of the type that might be called “ bourgeois . ” But there are growing number of people who in one way or another are rebel against the sy stem : welfare leach , youth gang , cultist , satanist , nazi , radical environmentalist , militiaman , etc . 162 . The system is currently engaged in a desperate struggle to overcome certain problem that threaten it survival , among which the problem of human behavior are the most important . If the system succeeds in acquiring sufficient control over human behavior quickly enough , it will probably survive . Otherwise it will break down . We think the issue will most likely be resolved within the next several decade , say 40 to 100 year . 163 . Suppose the system s urvives the crisis of the next several decade . By that time it will have to have solved , or at least brought under control , the principal problem that confront it , in particular that of “ socializing ” human being ; that is , making people sufficiently doc ile so that their behavior no longer threatens the system . That being accomplished , it doe not appear that there would be any further obstacle to the development of technology , and it would presumably advance toward it logical conclusion , which is compl ete control over everything on Earth , including human being and all other important organism . The system may become a unitary , monolithic organization , or it may be more or le fragmented and consist of a number of organization coexisting in a relatio nship that includes element of both cooperation and competition , just a today the government , the corporation and other large organization both cooperate and compete with one another . Human freedom mostly will have vanished , because individual and sm all group will be impotent vi -a-vis large organization armed with supertechnology and an arsenal of advanced psychological and biological tool for manipulating human being , besides instrument of surveillance and physical coercion . Only a small numbe r of people will have any real power , and even these probably will have only very limited freedom , because their behavior too will be regulated ; just a today our politician and corporation executive can retain their position of power only a long a their behavior remains within certain fairly narrow limit . 164 . Don ’ t imagine that the system will stop developing further technique for controlling human being and nature once the crisis of the next few decade is over and increasing control is no longer necessary for the system ’ s survival . On the contrary , once the hard time are over the system will increase it control over people and nature more rapidl y , because it will no longer be hampered by difficulty of the kind that it is currently experiencing . Survival is not the principal motive for extending control . As we explained in paragraph 87 -90 , technician and scientist carry on their work largel y a a surrogate activity ; that is , they satisfy their need for power by solving technical problem . They will continue to do this with unabated enthusiasm , and among the most interesting and challenging problem for them to solve will be those of underst anding the human body and mind and intervening in their development . For the “ good of humanity , ” of course . 165 . But suppose on the other hand that the stre ss of the coming decade prove to be too much for the system . If the system break down there may be a period of chaos , a “ time of trouble ” such a those that history ha recorded at various epoch in the past . It is impossible to predict 37 what would e merge from such a time of trouble , but at any rate the human race would be given a new chance . The greatest danger is that industrial society may begin to reconstitute itself within the first few year after the breakdown . Certainly there will be many p eople ( power -hungry type especially ) who will be anxious to get the factory running again . 166 . Therefore two task confront those who hate the servitude to which the industrial system is reducing the human race . First , we must work to heighten the social stress within the system so a to increase the likelihood that it will break down or be weakened sufficiently so that a revolution against it becomes p ossible . Second , it is necessary to develop and propagate an ideology that opposes technology and the industrial system . Such an ideology can become the basis for a revolution against industrial society if and when the system becomes sufficiently weakene d . And such an ideology will help to assure that , if and when industrial society break down , it remnant will be smashed beyond repair , so that the system can not be reconstituted . The factory should be destroyed , technical book burned , etc . HUMAN SU FFERING 167 . The industrial system will not break down purely a a result of revolutionary action . It will not be vulnerable to revolutionary attack unless it own internal problem of development lead it into very serious difficulty . So if the system break down it will do so either spontaneously , or through a process that is in part spontaneous but helped along by revolutionary . If the breakdown is su dden , many people will die , since the world ’ s population ha become so overblown that it can not even feed itself any longer without advanced technology . Even if the breakdown is gradual enough so that reduction of the population can occur more through low ering of the birth rate than through elevation of the death rate , the process of de -industrialization probably will be very chaotic and involve much suffering . It is naive to think it likely that technology can be phased out in a smoothly managed , orderly way , especially since the technophile will fight stubbornly at every step . Is it therefore cruel to work for the breakdown of the system ? Maybe , but maybe not . In the first place , revolutionary will not be able to break the system down unless it is a lready in enough trouble so that there would be a good chance of it eventually breaking down by itself anyway ; and the bigger the system grows , the more disastrous the consequence of it breakdown will be ; so it may be that revolutionary , by hastening the onset of the breakdown , will be reducing the extent of the disaster . 168 . In the second place , one ha to balance struggle and death against the loss of freedom and dignity . To many of u , freedom and dignity are more important than a long life or avoidance of physical pain . Besides , we all have to die some time , and it may be better to die fighting for survival , or for a cause , than to live a long but e mpty and purposeless life . 169 . In the third place , it is not at all certain that survival of the system will lead to le suffering than breakdown of the sy stem would . The system ha already caused , and is continuing to cause , immense suffering all over the world . Ancient culture , that for hundred of year gave people a satisfactory relationship with each other and with their environment , have been shatte red by contact with industrial society , and the result ha been a whole catalogue of economic , environmental , social and psychological problem . One of the effect of the intrusion of industrial society ha been that over much of the world traditional control on population have been thrown 38 out of balance . Hence the population explosion , with all that that implies . Then there is the psychological suffering that is widespread throughout the supposedly fortunate country of the West ( see paragraph 44 , 45 ) . No one know what will happen a a result of ozone depletion , the greenhouse effect and other environmental problem that can not yet be foreseen . And , a nuclear proliferation ha shown , new technology can not be kept out of the hand of dictator and irresponsible Third World nation . Would you like to speculate about what Iraq or North Korea will do with genetic engineering ? 170 . “ Oh ! ” say the technophi le , “ Science is going to fix all that ! We will conquer famine , eliminate psychological suffering , make everybody healthy and happy ! ” Yeah , sure . That ’ s what they said 200 year ago . The Industrial Revolution wa supposed to eliminate poverty , make every body happy , etc . The actual result ha been quite different . The technophile are hopelessly naive ( or self -deceiving ) in their understanding of social problem . They are unaware of ( or choose to ignore ) the fact that when large change , even seemingly beneficial one , are introduced into a society , they lead to a long sequence of other change , most of which are impossible to predict ( paragraph 103 ) . The result is disruption of the society . So it is very probable that in their attempt to end poverty and disease , engineer docile , happy personality and so forth , the technophile will create social system that are terribly troubled , even more so than the present one . For example , the scientist boast that they will end famine by creating new , genetic ally engineered food plant . But this will allow the human population to keep expanding indefinitely , and it is well known that crowding lead to increased stress and aggression . This is merely one example of the predictable problem that will arise . We emphasize that , a past experience ha shown , technical progress will lead to other new problem that can not be predicted in advance ( paragraph 103 ) . In fact , ever since the Industrial Revolution , technology ha been creating new problem for society far more rapidly than it ha been solving old one . Thus it will take a long and difficult period of trial and error for the technophile to work the bug out of their Brave New World ( if they every do ) . In the meantime there will be great suffering . So it is not at all clear that the survival of industrial society would involve le suffering than the breakdown of that society would . Technology ha gotten the human race into a fix from which there is not likely to be any easy escape . THE FUTURE 171 . But suppose now that industrial society doe survive the next several decade and that the bug do eventually get worked out of the system , so that it function s moothly . What kind of system will it be ? We will consider several possibility . 172 . First let u postulate that the computer scientist succeed in develop ing intelligent machine that can do all thing better than human being can do them . In that case presumably all work will be done by vast , highly organized system of machine and no human effort will be necessary . Either of two case might occur . The machine might be permitted to make all of their own decision without human oversight , or else human control over the machine might be retained . 173 . If the machine are permitted to make all their own decision , we can ’ t make any conjecture a to the result , because it is impossible to guess how such machine might behave . We only 39 point out that the fate of the human race would be at the mercy of the ma chine . It might be argued that the human race would never be foolish enough to hand over all power to the machine . But we are suggesting neither that the human race would voluntarily turn power over to the machine nor that the machine would willfully seize power . What we do suggest is that the human race might easily permit itself to drift into a position of such dependence on the machine that it would have no practical choice but to accept all of the machine ’ decision . As society and the problem s that face it become more and more complex and a machine become more and more intelligent , people will let machine make more and more of their decision for them , simply because machine - made decision will bring better result than man -made one . Even tually a stage may be reached at which the decision necessary to keep the system running will be so complex that human being will be incapable of making them intelligently . At that stage the machine will be in effective control . People won ’ t be able t o just turn the machine off , because they will be so dependent on them that turning them off would amount to suicide . 174 . On the other hand it is possible t hat human control over the machine may be retained . In that case the average man may have control over certain private machine of his own , such a his car or his personal computer , but control over large system of machine will be in the hand of a tiny elite —just a it is today , but with two difference . Due to improved technique the elite will have greater control over the mass ; and because human work will no longer be necessary the mass will be superfluous , a useless burden on the system . If the elite is ruthless they may simply decide to exterminate the mass of humanity . If they are humane they may use propaganda or other psychological or biological technique to reduce the birth rate until the mass of humanity becomes extinct , leaving the wo rld to the elite . Or , if the elite consists of soft- hearted liberal , they may decide to play the role of good shepherd to the rest of the human race . They will see to it that everyone ’ s physical need are satisfied , that all child are raised under p sychologically hygienic condition , that everyone ha a wholesome hobby to keep him busy , and that anyone who may become dissatisfied undergoes “ treatment ” to cure his “ problem . ” Of course , life will be so purposeless that people will have to be biological ly or psychologically engineered either to remove their need for the power process or to make them “ sublimate ” their drive for power into some harmless hobby . These engineered human being may be happy in such a society , but they most certainly will not b e free . They will have been reduced to the status of domestic animal . 175 . But suppose now that the computer scientist do not succeed in developing artifi cial intelligence , so that human work remains necessary . Even so , machine will take care of more and more of the simpler task so that there will be an increasing surplus of human worker at the lower level of ability . ( We see this happening already . There are many people who find it difficult or impossible to get work , because for intellectual or psychological reason they can not acquire the level of training necessary to make themselves useful in the present system . ) On those who are employed , ever -increasing demand will be placed : They will need more and more training , more and more ability , and will have to be ever more reliable , conforming and docile , because they will be more and more like cell of a giant organism . Their task will be increasin gly specialized , so that their work will be , in a sense , out of touch with the real world , being concentrated on one tiny slice of reality . The system will have to use any mean that it can , whether psychological or biological , to engineer people to be docile , to have the ability that the system requires and to “ sublimate ” their drive for power into some specialized task . But the statement that the people of such a society will have to be docile may require qualification . The society may find 40 competitiveness useful , provided that way are found of directing competitiveness into channel that serve the need of the system . We can imagine a future society in which there is endless competition for position of prestige and power . But no more than a very few people will ever reach the top , where the only real power is ( see end of paragraph 163 ) . Very repellent is a society in which a person can satisfy his need for power only by pushing large number of other people out of the way and depriving them of th eir opportunity for power . 176 . One can envision scenario that incorporate aspect of more than one of the possibility that we have just discussed . For i nstance , it may be that machine will take over most of the work that is of real , practical importance , but that human being will be kept busy by being given relatively unimportant work . It ha been suggested , for example , that a great development of the service industry might provide work for human being . Thus people would spent their time shining each other ’ s shoe , driving each other around in taxicab , making handicraft for one another , waiting on each other ’ s table , etc . This seems to u a tho roughly contemptible way for the human race to end up , and we doubt that many people would find fulfilling life in such pointless busy - work . They would seek other , dangerous outlet ( drug , crime , “ cult , ” hate group ) unless they were biologically or p ychologically engineered to adapt them to such a way of life . 177 . Needless to say , the scenario outlined above do not exhaust all the possibility . They only indicate the kind of outcome that seem to u most likely . But we can envision no plausible scenario that are any more palatable than the one we ’ ve just described . It is overwhelmingly probable that if the industrial- technological system survives the next 40 to 100 year , it will by that time have developed certain general characteristic : Individuals ( at least those of the “ bourgeois ” type , who are integrated into the system and make it run , and who therefore have all the power ) will be more depe ndent than ever on large organization ; they will be more “ socialized ” than ever and their physical and mental quality to a significant extent ( possibly to a very great extent ) will be those that are engineered into them rather than being the result of chance ( or of God ’ s will , or whatever ) ; and whatever may be left of wild nature will be reduced to remnant preserved for scientific study and kept under the supervision and management of scientist ( hence it will no longer be truly wild ) . In the long run ( say a few century from now ) it is likely that neither the human race nor any other important organism will exist a we know them today , because once you start modifying organism through genetic engineering there is no reason to stop at any particular point , so that the modification will probably continue until man and other organism have been utterly transformed . 178 . Whatever else may be the case , it is certain that technology is creating for human being a new physical and social environment radically different from the spectrum of environment to which natural selection ha adapted the human race physically and psychologically . If man is not adjuste d to this new environment by being artificially re -engineered , then he will be adapted to it through a long and painful process of natural selection . The former is far more likely than the latter . 179 . It would be better to dump the whole stinking system and take the consequence . STRATEGY 41 180 . The technophile are taking u all on an utterly reckless ride into the unknown . Many people understand something of what technological progress is doing to u yet take a passive attitude toward it because they think it is inevitable . But we ( FC ) don ’ t think it is inevit able . We think it can be stopped , and we will give here some indication of how to go about stopping it . 181 . As we stated in paragraph 166 , the two main ta sks for the present are to promote social stress and instability in industrial society and to develop and propagate an ideology that opposes technology and the industrial system . When the system becomes sufficiently stressed and unstable , a revolution aga inst technology may be possible . The pattern would be similar to that of the French and Russian Revolutions . French society and Russian society , for several decade prior to their respective revolution , showed increasing sign of stress and weakness . Meanwhile , ideology were being developed that offered a new world view that wa quite different from the old one . In the Russian case , revolutionary were actively working to undermine the old order . Then , when the old system wa put under sufficient a dditional stress ( by financial crisis in France , by military defeat in Russia ) it wa swept away by revolution . What we propose is something along the same line . 182 . It will be objected that the French and Russian Revolutions were failure . But most revolution have two goal . One is to destroy an old form of society and the other is to set up the new form of society envisioned by the revolutionary . The French and Russian revolutionary failed ( fortunately ! ) to create the new kind of society of which they dreamed , but they were quite successful in destroying the old society . We have no illusion about the feasibility of creating a new , ideal form of s ociety . Our goal is only to destroy the existing form of society . 183 . But an ideology , in order to gain enthusiastic support , must have a positive ideal a well a a negative one ; it must be for something a well a against something . The positive ideal that we propose is Nature . That is , wild nature : those aspect of the functioning of the Earth and it living thing that are independent of human manageme nt and free of human interference and control . And with wild nature we include human nature , by which we mean those aspect of the functioning of the human individual that are not subject to regulation by organized society but are product of chance , or f ree will , or God ( depending on your religious or philosophical opinion ) . 184 . Nature make a perfect counter -ideal to technology for several reason . Natur e ( that which is outside the power of the system ) is the opposite of technology ( which seek to expand indefinitely the power of the system ) . Most people will agree that nature is beautiful ; certainly it ha tremendous popular appeal . The radical environ mentalists already hold an ideology that exalts nature and opposes technology.30 It is not necessary for the sake of nature to set up some chimerical utopia or any new kind of social order . Nature take care of itself : It wa a spontaneous creation that ex isted long before any human society , and for countless century many different kind of human society coexisted with nature without doing it an excessive amount of damage . Only with the Industrial Revolution did the effect of human society on nature be come really devastating . To relieve the pressure on nature it is not necessary to create a special kind of social system , it is only necessary to get rid of industrial society . Granted , this will not solve all problem . Industrial society ha already do ne tremendous damage to nature and it will take a very long time for the scar to heal . Besides , even preindustrial society can do significant damage to nature . Nevertheless , getting rid of industrial society will accomplish a great deal . It will relieve 42 the worst of the pressure on nature so that the scar can begin to heal . It will remove the capacity of organized society to keep increasing it control over nature ( including human nature ) . Whatever kind of society may exist after the demise of the industrial system , it is certain that most people will live close to nature , because in the absence of advanced technology there is no other way that people can live . To feed themselves they must be peasant or herdsman or fisherman or hunter , etc . And , generally speaking , local autonomy should tend to increase , because lack of advanced technology and rapid communication will limit the capacity of government or other large organization to control local community . 185 . As for the negative consequence of e liminating industrial society —well , you can ’ t eat your cake and have it too . To gain one thing you have to sacrifice another . 186 . Most people hate psychological conflict . For this reason they avoid doing any serious thinking about difficult social issue , and they like to have such issue presented to them in simple , black -and-white term : this is all good and that is all bad . The revolutionary ideology should therefore be developed on two level . 187 . On t he more sophisticated level the ideology should address itself to people who are intelligent , thoughtful and rational . The object should be to create a core of people who will be opposed to the industrial system on a rational , thought -out basis , with full appreciation of the problem and ambiguity involved , and of the price that ha to be paid for getting rid of the system . It is particularly important to attract people of this type , a they are capable people and will be instrumental in influencing oth er . These people should be addressed on a rational a level a possible . Facts should never intentionally be distorted and intemperate language should be avoided . This doe not mean that no appeal can be made to the emotion , but in making such appeal care should be taken to avoid misrepresenting the truth or doing anything else that would destroy the intellectual respectability of the ideology . 188 . On a second level , the ideology should be propagated in a simplified form that will enable the unthinking majority to see the conflict of te chnology v . nature in unambiguous term . But even on this second level the ideology should not be expressed in language that is so cheap , intemperate or irrational that it alienates people of the thoughtful and rational type . Cheap , intemperate propaganda sometimes achieves impressive short -term gain , but it will be more advantageous in the long run to keep the loyalty of a small number of intelligently committed people than to arouse the passion of an unthinking , fickle mob who will change their attitude a soon a someone come along with a better propaganda gimmick . However , propaganda of the rabble -rousing type may be necessary when the system is nearing the point of collapse and there is a final struggle between rival ideology to determine which will become dominant when the old world -view go under . 189 . Prior to that final struggle , the revolutionary should not expect to have a majority of people on their side . History is made by active , determined minority , not by the majority , which seldom ha a clear and co nsistent idea of what it really want . Until the time come for the f inal push toward revolution,31 the task of revolutionary will be le to win the shallow support of the majority than to build a small core of deeply committed people . As for the major ity , it will be enough to make them aware of the existence of the new ideology and remind them of it frequently ; 43 though of course it will be desirable to get majority support to the extent that this can be done without weakening the core of seriously commi tted people . 190 . Any kind of social conflict help to destabilize the system , but one should be careful about what kind of conflict one encourages . The lin e of conflict should be drawn between the mass of the people and the power -holding elite of industrial society ( politician , scientist , upper -level business executive , government official , etc . ) . It should not be drawn between the revolutionary and t he mass of the people . For example , it would be bad strategy for the revolutionary to condemn Americans for their habit of consumption . Instead , the average American should be portrayed a a victim of the advertising and marketing industry , which ha suckered him into buying a lot of junk that he doesn ’ t need and that is very poor compensation for his lost freedom . Either approach is consistent with the fact . It is merely a matter of attitude whether you blame the advertising industry for manipulati ng the public or blame the public for allowing itself to be manipulated . As a matter of strategy one should generally avoid blaming the public . 191 . One should think twice before encouraging any other social conflict than that between the power -holding elite ( which wields technology ) and the general public ( over which technology exerts it power ) . For one thing , other conflict tend to distract attention from the important conflict ( between power -elite and ordinary people , between technology and nature ) ; for another thing , other conflict may actually tend to encourage technologization , because each side in such a conflict want to use technological power to gain advantage over it adversary . This is clearly seen in rivalry between nation . It also appears in ethnic conflict within nation . For example , in America many black leader are anxious to gain power for African Americans by placing b lack individual in the technological power -elite . They want there to be many black government official , scientist , corporation executive and so forth . In this way they are helping to absorb the African American subculture into the technological system . Generally speaking , one should encourage only those social conflict that can be fitted into the framework of the conflict of power -elite v . ordinary people , technology v . nature . 192 . But the way to discourage ethnic conflict is not through militant advocacy of minority right ( see paragraph 21 , 29 ) . Instead , the revolutionary should emphasize that although minority do suffer more or le disadvantage , thi s disadvantage is of peripheral significance . Our real enemy is the industrial- technological system , and in the struggle against the system , ethnic distinction are of no importance . 193 . The kind of revolution we have in mind will not necessarily involve an armed uprising against any government . It may or may not involve physical violence , but it will not be a political revolution . Its focus will be on te chnology and economics , not politics.32 194 . Probably the revolutionary should even avoid assuming political power , whether by legal or illegal mean , until the industrial system is stressed to the danger point and ha proved itself to be a failure in the eye of most people . Suppose for example that some “ green ” party should win control of the United States Congress in an election . In order to avoid betray ing or watering down their own ideology they would have to take vigorous measure to turn economic growth into economic shrinkage . To the average man the result would appear disastrous : There would be 44 massive unemployment , shortage of commodity , etc . Even if the grosser ill effect could be avoided through superhumanly skillful management , still people would have to begin giving up the luxury to which they have become addicted . Dissatisfaction would grow , the “ green ” party would be voted out of of fice and the revolutionary would have suffered a severe setback . For this reason the revolutionary should not try to acquire political power until the system ha gotten itself into such a mess that any hardship will be seen a resulting from the failure of the industrial system itself and not from the policy of the revolutionary . The revolution against technology will probably have to be a revolution by outsider , a revolution from below and not from above . 195 . The revolution must be international and worldwide . It can not be carried out on a nation- by-nation basis . Whenever it is suggested that the United States , for example , should cut back on technological progress or economic growth , people get hysterical and start screaming that if we fall behind in technology the Japanese will get ahead of u . Holy robot ! The world will fly off it orbit if the Japanese ever sell more car than we do ! ( Nati onalism is a great promoter of technology . ) More reasonably , it is argued that if the relatively democratic nation of the world fall behind in technology while nasty , dictatorial nation like China , Vietnam and North Korea continue to progress , eventually the dictator may come to dominate the world . That is why the industrial system should be attacked in all nation simultaneously , to the extent that this may be possible . True , there is no assurance that the industrial system can be destroyed at approxi mately the same time all over the world , and it is even conceivable that the attempt to overthrow the system could lead instead to the domination of the system by dictator . That is a risk that ha to be taken . And it is worth taking , since the differenc e between a “ democratic ” industrial system and one controlled by dictator is small compared with the difference between an industrial system and a non- industrial one.33 It might even be argued that an industrial system controlled by dictator would be pref erable , because dictator -controlled system usually have proved inefficient , hence they are presumably more likely to break down . Look at Cuba . 196 . Revolut ionaries might consider favoring measure that tend to bind the world economy into a unified whole . Free trade agreement like NAFTA and GATT are probably harmful to the environment in the short run , but in the long run they may perhaps be advantageous be cause they foster economic interdependence between nation . It will be easier to destroy the industrial system on a worldwide basis if the world economy is so unified that it breakdown in any one major nation will lead to it breakdown in all industrialized nation . 197 . Some people take the line that modern man ha too much power , too much control over nature ; they argue for a more passive attitude on the part of the human race . At best these people are expressing themselves unclearly , because they fail to distinguish between power for large organization and power for individual and small group . It is a mistake to argue for powerlessness and passivity , because people need power . Mode rn man a a collective entity — that is , the industrial system—has immense power over nature , and we ( FC ) regard this a evil . But modern individual and small group of individual have far le power than primitive man ever did . Generally speaking , the vast power of “ modern man ” over nature is exercised not by individual or small group but by large organization . To the extent that the average modern individual can wield the power of technology , he is permitted to do so only within narrow limit and only under the supervision and control of the system . ( You need a license for everything and 45 with the license come rule and regulation . ) The individual ha only those technological power with which the system chooses to pr ovide him . His personal power over nature is slight . 198 . Primitive individual and small group actually had considerable power over nature ; or maybe it wo uld be better to say power within nature . When primitive man needed food he knew how to find and prepare edible root , how to track game and take it with homemade weapon . He knew how to protect himself from heat cold , rain , dangerous animal , etc . But primitive man did relatively little damage to nature because the collective power of primitive society wa negligible compared to the collective power of industrial society . 199 . Instead of arguing for powerlessness and passivity , one should argue that the power of the industrial system should be broken , and that this will greatly increase the power and freedom of individual and small group . 200 . Until the industrial system ha been thoroughly wrecked , the destruction of that system must be the revolutionary ’ only goal . Other goal would distract attention an d energy from the main goal . More importantly if the revolutionary permit themselves to have any other goal than the destruction of technology , they will be tempted to use technology a a tool for reaching that other goal . If they give in to that temptation , they will fall right back into the technological trap , because modern technology is a unified , tightly organized system , so that , in order to retain some technology , one find oneself obliged to retain most technology , hence one end up sacrificing only token amount of technology . 201 . Suppose for example that the revolutionary took “ social justice ” a a goal . Human nature being what it is , social justice would not come about spontaneously ; it would have to be enforced . In order to enforce it the revolutionary would have to retain central organization and control . For that they would need rapid long -distance transportation and communication , and therefore all the technology needed to support the transportation and communication system . To feed and clothe poor people they would have to use agricultural and manufacturing technology . And so forth . So that the attempt to insure social justice would force them to retain most part of the technological system . Not that we have anything against social justice , but it must not be allowed to interfere with the effort to get rid of the technological system . 202 . It would be hopeless for revolutionary to try to attack the system without using some modern technology . If nothing else they must use the communication medium to spread their message . But they should use modern technology for only one purpose : to attack the technological system . 203 . Imagine an alcoholic sitting with a barrel of wine in front of him . Suppose he start saying to himself , “ Wine isn ’ t bad for you if used in moderation . Why , they say small amount of wine are even good for you ! It won ’ t do me any harm if I take just one little drink… . ” Well you know what is going to happen . Never for get that the human race with technology is just like an alcoholic with a barrel of wine . 204 . Revolutionaries should have a many child a they can . Ther e is strong scientific evidence that social attitude are to a significant extent inherited . No one suggests that a social 46 attitude is a direct outcome of a person ’ s genetic constitution , but it appears that personality trait are partly inherited and tha t certain personality trait tend , within the context of our society , to make a person more likely to hold this or that social attitude . Objections to these finding have been raised , but the objection are feeble and seem to be ideologically motivated . In any event , no one denies that child tend on the average to hold social attitude similar to those of their parent . From our point of view it doesn ’ t matter all that much whether the attitude are passed on genetically or through childhood training . In either case they are passed on . 205 . The trouble is that many of the people who are inclined to rebel against the industrial system are also concerned about the population problem , hence they are apt to have few or no child . In this way they may be handing the world over to the sort of people who support or at least accept the industrial system . To ensure the strength of the next generation of revol utionaries the present generation should reproduce itself abundantly . In doing so they will be worsening the population problem only slightly . And the important problem is to get rid of the industrial system , because once the industrial system is gone th e world ’ s population necessarily will decrease ( see paragraph 167 ) ; whereas , if the industrial system survives , it will continue developing new technique of food production that may enable the world ’ s population to keep increasing almost indefinitely . 206 . With regard to revolutionary strategy , the only point on which we absolutely insist are that the single overriding goal must be the elimination of modern technology , and that no other goal can be allowed to compete with this one . For the rest , revolutionary should take an empirical approach . If experience indicates that some of the recommendation made in the foregoing paragraph are not going to give g ood result , then those recommendation should be discarded . TWO KINDS OF TECHNOLOGY 207 . An argument likely to be raised against our proposed revolution is that it is bound to fail , because ( it is claimed ) throughout history technology ha always progressed , never regressed , hence technological regression is impossible . But this claim is false . 208 . We distinguish between two kind of technology , which we will call small- scale technology and organization- dependent technology . Small- scale technology is technology that can be used by small- scale community withou t outside assistance . Organization- dependent technology is technology that depends on large -scale social organization . We are aware of no significant case of regression in small -scale technology . But organization- dependent technology doe regress when the social organization on which it depends break down . Example : When the Roman Empire fell apart the Romans ’ small- scale technology survived because any clever village craftsman could build , for instance , a water wheel , any skilled smith could make stee l by Roman method , and so forth . But the Romans ’ organization- dependent technology did regress . Their aqueduct fell into disrepair and were never rebuilt . Their technique of road construction were lost . The Roman system of urban sanitation wa forg otten , so that not until rather recent time did the sanitation of European city equal that of Ancient Rome . 209 . The reason why technology ha seemed alwa y to progress is that , until perhaps a century or two before the Industrial Revolution , most technology wa small -scale technology . But most of the technology developed since the Industrial Revolution is organization- dependent 47 technology . Take the refri gerator for example . Without factory -made part or the facility of a postindustrial machine shop it would be virtually impossible for a handful of local craftsman to build a refrigerator . If by some miracle they did succeed in building one it would be useless to them without a reliable source of electric power . So they would have to dam a stream and build a generator . Generators require large amount of copper wire . Imagine trying to make that wire without modern machinery . And where would they get a gas suitable for refrigeration ? It would be much easier to build an icehouse or preserve food by drying or picking , a wa done before the invention of the refrigerator . 210 . So it is clear that if the industrial system were once thoroughly broken down , refrigeration technology would quickly be lost . The same is true of other organization- dependent technology . And once this technology had been lost for a g eneration or so it would take century to rebuild it , just a it took century to build it the first time around . Surviving technical book would be few and scattered . An industrial society , if built from scratch without outside help , can only be built in a series of stage : You need tool to make tool to make tool to make tools… A long process of economic development and progress in social organization is required . And , even in the absence of an ideology opposed to technology , there is no reason to believe that anyone would be interested in rebuilding industrial society . The enthusiasm for “ progress ” is a phenomenon peculiar to the modern form of society , and it seems not to have existed prior to the 17th century or thereabouts . 211 . In the late Middle Ages there were four main civilization that were about equally “ advanced ” : Europe , the Islamic world , India , and the Far East ( China , Japan , Korea ) . Three of those civilization remained more or le stable , and only Europe became dynamic . No one know why Europe became dynamic at that time ; historian have their theory but these are only speculation . At any rate , it is clear that rapid development toward a technological form of society occurs only under special condition . So there is no reason to assume that a long -lasting technological regression can not be brought about . 212 . Would society eventually develop again toward an industrial -technological form ? Maybe , but there is no use in worrying about it , since we can ’ t predict or control event 500 or 1,000 year in the future . Those problem must be dealt with by the people who will live at that time . THE DANGER OF LEFTISM 213 . Because of their need for rebellion and for membership in a movement , leftist or person of similar psychological type often are unattracted to a rebellious or activist movement whose goal and membership are not initially leftist . The resulting influx of leftish type can easily turn a non- leftist movement into a leftist one , so that leftist goal replace or distort the original goal of the movement . 214 . To avoid this , a movement that exalts nature and opposes technology must take a resolutely anti-leftist stance and must avoid all collaboration with leftist . Leftism is in the long run inconsistent with wild nature , with human freedom and with the elimination of modern technology . Leftism is collectivist ; it seek to bind togethe r the entire world ( both nature and the human race ) into a unified whole . But this implies management of nature and of human life by 48 organized society , and it requires advanced technology . You can ’ t have a united world without rapid transportation and communication , you can ’ t make all people love one another without sophisticated psychological technique , you can ’ t have a “ planned society ” without the necessary technological base . Above all , leftism is driven by the need for power , and the leftist seek power on a collective basis , through identification with a mass movement or an organization . Leftism is unlikely ever to give up technology , because technology is too valuable a source of collective power . 215 . The anarchist34 too seek power , but he seek it on an individual or small -group basis ; he want individual and small group to be able to control the circumstance of their own life . He opposes technology because it make small group dependent on large organization . 216 . Some leftist may seem to oppose technology , but they will oppose it only so long a they are outsider and the technological system is controlled by non- leftist . If leftism ever becomes dominant in society , so that the technological system becomes a tool in the hand of leftist , they will enthusiastically use it and promote it gro wth . In doing this they will be repeating a pattern that leftism ha shown again and again in the past . When the Bolsheviks in Russia were outsider , they vigorously opposed censorship and the secret police , they advocated self -determination for ethnic m inorities , and so forth ; but a soon a they came into power themselves , they imposed a tighter censorship and created a more ruthless secret police than any that had existed under the tsar , and they oppressed ethnic minority at least a much a the tsa r had done . In the United States , a couple of decade ago when leftist were a minority in our university , leftist professor were vigorous proponent of academic freedom , but today , in those of our university where leftist have become dominant , the y have shown themselves ready to take away from everyone else ’ s academic freedom . ( This is “ political correctness . ” ) The same will happen with leftist and technology : They will use it to oppress everyone else if they ever get it under their own control . 217 . In earlier revolution , leftist of the most power -hungry type , repeatedly , have first cooperated with non- leftist revolutionary , a well a with leftist of a more libertarian inclination , and later have double -crossed them to seize power for themselves . Robespierre did this in the French Revolution , the Bolsheviks did it in the Russian Revolution , the communist did it in Spain in 1938 and Castro and his follower did it in Cuba . Given the past history of leftism , it would be utterly foolish for non -leftist revolutionary today to collaborate with leftist . 218 . Various thinker have pointed out that leftism is a kind of religion . Leftism is not a religion in the strict sense because leftist doctrine doe not postulate the existence of any supernatural being . But , for the leftist , leftism play a psyc hological role much like that which religion play for some people . The leftist need to believe in leftism ; it play a vital role in his psychological economy . His belief are not easily modified by logic or fact . He ha a deep conviction that leftism is morally Right with a capital R , and that he ha not only a right but a duty to impose leftist morality on everyone . ( However , many of the people we are referring to a “ leftist ” do not think of themselves a leftist and would not describe their syst em of belief a leftism . We use the term “ leftism ” because we don ’ t know of any better word to designate the spectrum of related creed that includes the feminist , gay right , political correctness , etc. , movement , and because these movement have a st rong affinity with the old left . See paragraph 227 -230 . ) 49 219 . Leftism is a totalitarian force . Wherever leftism is in a position of power it tends to inva de every private corner and force every thought into a leftist mold . In part this is because of the quasi - religious character of leftism : everything contrary to leftist belief represents Sin . More importantly , leftism is a totalitarian force because of the leftist ’ drive for power . The leftist seek to satisfy his need for power through identification with a social movement and he try to go through the power process by helping to pursue and attain the goal of the movement ( see paragraph 83 ) . But no matter how far the movement ha gone in attaining it goal the leftist is never satisfied , because his activism is a surrogate activity ( see paragraph 41 ) . That is , the leftist ’ s real motive is not to attain the ostensible goal of leftism ; in reality h e is motivated by the sense of power he get from struggling for and then reaching a social goal.35 Consequently the leftist is never satisfied with the goal he ha already attained ; his need for the power process lead him always to pursue some new goal . The leftist want equal opportunity for minority . When that is attained he insists on statistical equality of achievement by minority . And a long a anyone harbor in some corner of his mind a negative attitude toward some minority , the leftist h a to re- educated him . And ethnic minority are not enough ; no one can be allowed to have a negative attitude toward homosexual , disabled people , fat people , old people , ugly people , and on and on and on . It ’ s not enough that the public should be infor med about the hazard of smoking ; a warning ha to be stamped on every package of cigarette . Then cigarette advertising ha to be restricted if not banned . The activist will never be satisfied until tobacco is outlawed , and after that it will be alcoho l , then junk food , etc . Activists have fought gross child abuse , which is reasonable . But now they want to stop all spanking . When they have done that they will want to ban something else they consider unwholesome , then another thing and then another . They will never be satisfied until they have complete control over all child rearing practice . And then they will move on to another cause . 220 . Suppose you asked leftist to make a list of all the thing that were wrong with society , and then suppose you instituted every social change that they demanded . It is safe to say that within a couple of year the majority of leftist would find something new to complain about , some new social “ evil ” to correct ; because , once again , the leftist is motivated le by distress at society ’ s ill than by the need to satisfy his drive for power by imposing his solution on society . 221 . Because of the restriction placed on their thought and behavior by their high level of socialization , many leftist of the over -socialized type can not pursue power in the way that other people do . For them the drive for power ha only one morally acceptable outlet , and that is in the struggle to impose their morality on everyone . 222 . Leftists , especially those of the oversocialized type , are True Believers in the sense of Eric Hoffer ’ s book , The True Believer . But not all True Believers are of the same psychological type a leftist . Presumably a true- believing nazi , for instance , is very dif ferent psychologically from a true-believing leftist . Because of their capacity for single- minded devotion to a cause , True Believers are a useful , perhaps a necessary , ingredient of any revolutionary movement . This present a problem with which we must admit we don ’ t know how to deal . We aren ’ t sure how to harness the energy of the True Believer to a revolution against technology . At present all we can say is that no True Believer will make a safe recruit to the revolution unless his commitment is exclusively to the destruction of technology . If he is committed also to another ideal , he may want to use technology a a tool for pursuing that other ideal ( see paragraph 200 , 201 ) . 50 223 . Some reader may say , “ This stuff about leftism is a lot of crap . I know John and Jane who are leftish type and they don ’ t have all these totalitarian tendency . ” It ’ s quite true that many leftist , possibly even a numeri cal majority , are decent people who sincerely believe in tolerating others ’ value ( up to a point ) and wouldn ’ t want to use high- handed method to reach their social goal . Our remark about leftism are not meant to apply to every individual leftist but to describe the general character of leftism a a movement . And the general character of a movement is not necessarily determined by the numerical proportion of the various kind of people involved in the movement . 224 . The people who rise to position of power in leftist movement tend to be leftist of the most power -hungry type , because power -hungry people are those who strive hardest to get into position of power . Once the power -hungry type have captured control of the movement , there are many leftist of a gentler breed who inwardly disapprove of many of the action of the leader , but can not bring themselves to oppose them . They need their faith in the movement , and because they can not give up this faith they go along with the leader . True , some leftist do have the gut to oppose the totalitarian tendency that emerge , but they generally lose , because the power -hungry type are better organized , a re more ruthless and Machiavellian and have taken care to build themselves a strong power base . 225 . These phenomenon appeared clearly in Russia and other cou ntries that were taken over by leftist . Similarly , before the breakdown of communism in the , USSR , leftish type in the West would seldom criticize that country . If prodded they would admit that the USSR did many wrong thing , but then they would try t o find excuse for the communist and begin talking about the fault of the West . They always opposed Western military resistance to communist aggression . Leftish type all over the world vigorously protested the U.S . military action in Vietnam , but when the USSR invaded Afghanistan they did nothing . Not that they approved of the Soviet action ; but because of their leftist faith , they just couldn ’ t bear to put themselves in opposition to communism . Today , in those of our university where “ political c orrectness ” ha become dominant , there are probably many leftish type who privately disapprove of the suppression of academic freedom , but they go along with it anyway . 226 . Thus the fact that many individual leftist are personally mild and fairly tolerant people by no mean prevents leftism a a whole form having a totalitarian tendency . 227 . Our discussion of leftism ha a serious weakness . It is still far from clear what we mean by the word “ leftist . ” There doesn ’ t seem to be much we can do about this . Today leftism is fragmented into a whole spectrum of ac tivist movement . Yet not all activist movement are leftist , and some activist movement ( e.g. , radical environmentalism ) seem to include both personality of the leftist type and personality of thoroughly un -leftist type who ought to know better tha n to collaborate with leftist . Varieties of leftist fade out gradually into variety of non - leftist and we ourselves would often be hard- pressed to decide whether a given individual is or is not a leftist . To the extent that it is defined at all , our conception of leftism is defined by the discussion of it that we have given in this article , and we can only advise the reader to use his own judgment in deciding who is a leftist . 51 228 . But it will be helpful to list some criterion for diagnosing leftism . These criterion can not be applied in a cut and dried manner . Some individual may meet some of the criterion without being leftist , some leftist may not me et any of the criterion . Again , you just have to use your judgment . 229 . The leftist is oriented toward large -scale collectivism . He emphasizes the duty of the individual to serve society and the duty of society to take care of the individual . He ha a negative attitude toward individualism . He often take a moralistic tone . He tends to be for gun control , for sex education and other psychologically “ enlig htened ” educational method , for social planning , for affirmative action , for multiculturalism . He tends to identify with victim . He tends to be against competition and against violence , but he ofte n find excuse for those leftist who do commit violen ce . He is fond of using the common catch- phrase of the left , like “ racism , ” “ sexism , ” “ homophobia , ” “ capitalism , ” “ imperialism , ” “ neocolonialism , ” “ genocide , ” “ social change , ” “ social justice , ” “ social responsibility . ” Maybe the best diagnostic trait of the leftist is his tendency to sympathize with the following movement : feminism , gay right , ethnic right , disability right , animal right , political correctness . Anyone who strongly sympathizes with all of these movement is a lmost certainly a leftist.36 230 . The more dangerous leftist , that is , those who are most power -hungry , are often characterized by arrogance or by a dogmatic approach to ideology . However , the most dangerous leftist of all may be certain oversocialized type who avoid irritating display of aggressiveness and refrain from advertising their leftism , but work quietly and unobtrusively to promote collectivist value , “ enlightened ” psyc hological technique for socializing child , dependence of the individual on the system , and so forth . These crypto -leftists ( a we may call them ) approximate certain bourgeois type a far a practical action is concerned , but differ from them in psychology , ideology and motivation . The ordinary bourgeois try to bring people under control of the system in order to protect his way of life , or he doe so simply because his attitude are conventional . The crypto -leftist try to bring people under cont rol of the system because he is a True Believer in a collectivistic ideology . The crypto -leftist is differentiated from the average leftist of the oversocialized type by the fact that his rebellious impulse is weaker and he is more securely socialized . He is differentiated from the ordinary well- socialized bourgeois by the fact that there is some deep lack within him that make it necessary for him to devote himself to a cause and immerse himself in a collectivity . And maybe his ( well -sublimated ) drive f or power is stronger than that of the average bourgeois . FINAL NOTE 231 . Throughout this article we ’ ve made imprecise statement and statement that ought to have had all sort of qualification and reservation attached to them ; and some of our statement may be flatly false . Lack of sufficient information and the need for brevity made it impossible for u to formulate our assertion more precisely or add al l the necessary qualification . And of course in a discussion of this kind one must rely heavily on intuitive judgment , and that can sometimes be wrong . So we don ’ t claim that this article express more than a crude approximation to the truth . 232 . All the same , we are reasonably confident that the general outline of the picture we have painted here are roughly correct . Just one possible weak point need to be mentioned . We have 52 portrayed leftism in it modern form a a phenomenon peculiar to our time and a a symptom of the disruption of the power process . But we might possibly be wrong about this . Oversocialized type who try to satisfy their drive fo r power by imposing their morality on everyone have certainly been around for a long time . But we think that the decisive role played by feeling of inferiority , low self -esteem , powerlessness , identification with victim by people who are not themselves victim , is a peculiarity of modern leftism . Identification with victim by people not themselves victim can be seen to some extent in 19th century leftism and early Christianity , but a far a we can make out , symptom of low self -esteem , etc. , were not nearly so evident in these movement , or in any other movement , a they are in modern leftism . But we are not in a position to assert confidently that no such movement have existed prior to modern leftism . This is a significant question to which historian ought to give their attention . NOTES 1 ( Paragraph 19 ) We are not asserting that all , or even most , bully and ruthless competitor suffer from feeling of inferiority . 2 ( Paragraph 25 ) During the Vic torian period many oversocialized people suffered from serious psychological problem a a result of repressing or trying to repress their sexual feeling . Freud apparently based his theory on people of this type . Today the focus of socialization ha s hifted from sex to aggression . 3 ( Paragraph 27 ) Not necessarily including specialist in engineering or the “ hard ” science . 4 ( Paragraph 28 ) There are many individual of the middle and upper class who resist some of these value , but usually their re sistance is more or le covert . Such resistance appears in the mass medium only to a very limited extent . The main thrust of propaganda in our society is in favor of the stated value . The main reason why these value have become , so to speak , the offic ial value of our society is that they are useful to the industrial system . Violence is discouraged because it disrupts the functioning of the system . Racism is discouraged because ethnic conflict also disrupt the system , and discrimination waste the talent of minority -group member who could be useful to the system . Poverty must be “ cured ” because the underclass cause problem for the system and contact with the underclass lower the morale of the other class . Women are encouraged to have career because their talent are useful to the system and , more importantly , because by having regular job woman become better integrated into the system and tied directly to it rather than to their family . This help to weaken family solidarity . ( The leader of the system say they want to strengthen the family , but they really mean is that they want the family to serve a an effective tool for socializing child in accord with the need of the system . We argue in paragraph 51 , 52 that the system can not afford to let the family or other small- scale social group be strong or autonomous . ) 5 ( Paragraph 42 ) It may be argued that the majority of people don ’ t want to make their own decision but want leader to do their thinking for them . There is an element of truth in this . People like to make their own decision in small matter , but making decision on difficult , fundamental question requires facing up to psychological conflict , and most people hate psychological conflict . Hence they tend to lean on ot hers in making difficult decision . But it 53 doe not follow that they like to have decision imposed upon them without having any opportunity to influence those decision . The majority of people are natural follower , not leader , but they like to have di rect personal access to their leader , they want to be able to influence the leader and participate to some extent in making even the difficult decision . At least to that degree they need autonomy . 6 ( Paragraph 44 ) Some of the symptom listed are similar to those shown by caged animal . To explain how these symptom arise from deprivation with respect to the power process : common- sense understanding of human nature tell one that lack of goal whose attainment requires effort lead to boredom and that boredom , long continued , often lead eventually to depression . Failure to attain goal lead to frustration and lowering of self -esteem . Frustration lead to anger , anger to aggression , often in the form of spouse or child abuse . It ha been shown that long -continued frustration commonly lead to depression and that depression tends to cause guilt , sleep disorder , eating disorder and bad feeling about oneself . Those who are tending toward depression seek pleasure a an antidote ; hence insatiable hedo nism and excessive sex , with perversion a a mean of getting new kick . Boredom too tends to cause excessive pleasure- seeking since , lacking other goal , people often use pleasure a a goal . 7 ( Paragraph 52 ) A partial exception may be made for a few pa ssive , inward- looking group , such a the Amish , which have little effect on the wider society . Apart from these , some genuine small- scale community do exist in America today . For instance , youth gang and “ cult . ” Everyone regard them a dangerous , a nd so they are , because the member of these group are loyal primarily to one another rather than to the system , hence the system can not control them . Or take the gypsy . The gypsy commonly get away with theft and fraud because their loyalty are su ch that they can always get other gypsy to give testimony that “ prof ” their innocence . Obviously the system would be in serious trouble if too many people belonged to such group . Some of the early -20th century Chinese thinker who were concerned wit h modernizing China recognized the necessity breaking down small -scale social group such a the family : “ ( According to Sun Yat -sen ) the Chinese people needed a new surge of patriotism , which would lead to a transfer of loyalty from the family to the state … . ( According to Li Huang ) traditional attachment , particularly to the family had to be abandoned if nationalism were to develop in China . ” ( Chester C . Tan , “ Chinese Political Thought in the Twentieth Century , ” page 125 , page 297 . ) 8 ( Paragraph 56 ) Yes , we know that 19th century America had it problem , and serious one , but for the sake of brevity we have to express ourselves in simplified term . 9 ( Paragraph 61 ) We leave aside the “ underclass . ” We are speaking of the mainstream . 10 ( Paragraph 62 ) Some social scientist , educator , “ mental health ” professional and the like are doing their best to push the social drive into group 1 by trying to see to it that everyone ha a satisfactory social life . 11 ( Paragraphs 63 , 82 ) Is the drive for endless mat erial acquisition really an artificial creation of the advertising and marketing industry ? Certainly there is no innate human drive for material acquisition . There have been many culture in which people have desired little material wealth beyond what wa necessary to satisfy their basic physical need ( Australian aborigine , 54 traditional Mexican peasant culture , some African culture ) . On the other hand there have also been many pre- industrial culture in which material acquisition ha played an important role . So we can ’ t claim that today ’ s acquisition -oriented culture is exclusively a creation of the advertising and marketing industry . But it is clear that the advertising and marketing industry ha had an important part in creating that culture . The b ig corporation that spend million on advertising wouldn ’ t be spending that kind of money without solid proof that they were getting it back in increased sale . One member of FC met a sale manager a couple of year ago who wa frank enough to tell him , “ Our job is to make people buy thing they don ’ t want and don ’ t need . ” He then described how an untrained novice could present people with the fact about a product , and make no sale at all , while a trained and experienced professional salesman would make lot of sale to the same people . This show that people are manipulated into buying thing they don ’ t really want . 12 ( Paragraph 64 ) The problem of purposelessness seems to have become le serious during the last 15 year or so , because people now feel le secure physically and economically than they did earlier , and the need for security provides them with a goal . But purposelessness ha been replaced by frustration over the difficulty of attaining security . We emphasize the problem of purposelessne s because the liberal and leftist would wish to solve our social problem by having society guarantee everyone ’ s security ; but if that could be done it would only bring back the problem of purposelessness . The real issue is not whether society provides well or poorly for people ’ s security ; the trouble is that people are dependent on the system for their security rather than having it in their own hand . This , by the way , is part of the reason why some people get worked up about the right to bear arm ; possession of a gun put that aspect of their security in their own hand . 13 ( Paragraph 66 ) Conservatives ’ effort to decrease the amount of government regulation are of little benefit to the average man . For one thing , only a fraction of the regulation can be eliminated because most regulation are necessary . For another thing , most of the deregulation affect business rather than the average individual , so that it main effect is to take power from the government and give it to private corporation . What this mean for the average man is that government interference in his life is replaced by interference from big corporation , which may be permitted , for example , to dump more chemical that get into his water supply and give him cancer . The conservative are just taking the average man for a sucker , exploiting his resentment of Big Government to promote the power of Big Business . 14 ( Paragraph 73 and 153 ) When someone approves of the purpose for which propaganda is being used in a given case , he gene rally call it “ education ” or applies to it some similar euphemism . But propaganda is propaganda regardless of the purpose for which it is used . 15 ( Paragraph 83 ) We are not expressing approval or disapproval of the Panama invasion . We onl y use it to illu strate a point . 16 ( Paragraph 95 ) When the American colony were under British rule there were fewer and le effective legal guarantee of freedom than there were after the American Constitution went into effect , yet there wa more personal freedom in pre -industrial America , both before and after the War of Independence , than there wa after the Industrial Revolution took hold in this country . We quote from “ Violence in America : Historical and Comparative Perspectives , ” 55 edited by Hugh Davis Graham and Ted Robert Gurr , Chapter 12 by Roger Lane , page 476- 478 : “ The progressive heightening of standard of propriety , and with it the increasing reliance on official law enforcement ( in l9th century America ) … were common to the whole society … . [ T ] he change in social behavior is so long term and so widespread a to suggest a connection with the most fundamental of contemporary social process ; that of industrial urbanization itself… . Massachusetts in 1835 had a population of some 660,940 , 81 percent rural , overwhelmingly preindustrial and native born . It ’ s citizen were used to considerable personal freedom . Whether teamster , farmer or artisan , they were all accustomed to setting their own schedule , and the nature of their work made them physically independent of each other… . Individual problem , sin or even crime , were not generally cause for wider social concern … . ” But the impact of the twin movement to the city and to the factory , both just gathering force in 1835 , had a progressive effect on personal behavior throughout the 19th century and into the 20th . The factory demanded regularity of behavior , a life governed by obedience to the rhythm of clock and calendar , the demand of foreman and supervisor . In the city or town , the need of livi ng in closely packed neighborhood inhibited many action previously unobjectionable . Both blue - and white -collar employee in larger establishment were mutually dependent on their fellow ; a one man ’ s work fit into anther ’ s , so one man ’ s business wa n o longer his own . The result of the new organization of life and work were apparent by 1900 , when some 76 percent of the 2,805,346 inhabitant of Massachusetts were classified a urbanites . Much violent or irregular behavior which had been tolerable in a casual , independent society wa no longer acceptable in the more formalized , cooperative atmosphere of the later period… . The move to the city had , in short , produced a more tractable , more socialized , more ‘ c ivilized ’ generation than it predecessor . ” 17 ( Paragraph 117 ) Apologists for the system are fond of citing case in which election have been decided by one or two vote , but such case are rare . 18 ( Paragraph 119 ) “ Today , in technologically advanced land , men live very similar life in spite of geographical , religious , and political difference . The daily life of a Christian bank clerk in Chicago , a Buddhist bank clerk in Tokyo , and a Communist bank clerk in Moscow are far more alike than the life of any one of them is like that of any single man who lived a thousand year ago . These similarity are the result of a common technology… . ” L . Sprague de Camp , “ The Ancient Engineers , ” Ballantine edition , page 17 . The life of the three bank clerk are not identical . Ideology doe have some effect . But all technological society , in order to survive , must evolve along approximately the same trajectory . 19 ( Paragraph 123 ) Just think an irresponsible genetic engineer might create a lot of terrorist . 20 ( Paragraph 124 ) For a further example of undesirable consequence of medical progress , suppose a reliable cure for cancer is discovered . Even if the treatment is too expensive to be available to any but the elite , it will greatly reduce their incentive to stop the escape of carcinogen into the environment . 21 ( Paragraph 128 ) Since many people may find paradoxical the notion that a large number of good thing can add up to a bad thing , we illustrate with an analogy . Suppose Mr . A is playing chess with Mr . B . Mr . C , a Grand Master , is looking ove r Mr . A ’ s shoulder . Mr . A of course want to win his game , so if Mr . C point out a good move for him to make , he is doing Mr . A a 56 favor . But suppose now that Mr . C tell Mr . A how to make all of his move . In each particular instance he doe Mr . A a favor by showing him his best move , but by making all of his move for him he spoil his game , since there is not point in Mr . A ’ s playing the game at all if someone else make all his move . The situation of modern man is analogous to that of Mr . A . The system make an individual ’ s life easier for him in innumerable way , but in doing so it deprives him of control over his own fate . 22 ( Paragraph 137 ) Here we are considering only the conflict of value within the mainstream . For the sake of simplicity we leave out of the picture “ outsider ” value like the idea that wild nature is more important than human economic welfare . 23 ( Paragraph 137 ) Self- interest is not necessarily material self-interest . It can consist in fulfillment of some psychological need , for example , by promoting one ’ s own ideology or religion . 24 ( Paragraph 139 ) A qualification : It is in the interest of the system to permit a certain prescribed degree of freedom in some area . For example , economic freedom ( with suitable limitation s and restraint ) ha proved effective in promoting economic growth . But only planned , circumscribed , limited freedom is in the interest of the system . The individual must always be kept on a leash , even if the leash is sometimes long ( see paragraph 94 , 97 ) . 25 ( Paragraph 143 ) We don ’ t mean to suggest that the efficiency or the potential for survival of a society ha always been inversely proportional to the amount of pressure or discomfort to which the society subject people . That certainly is not the case . There is good reason to believe that many primitive society subjected people to le pressure than European society did , but European society proved far more efficient than any primitive society and always won out in conflict with such society because of the adva ntages conferred by technology . 26 ( Paragraph 147 ) If you think that more effective law enforcement is unequivocally good because it suppresses crime , then remember that crime a defined by the system is not necessarily what you would cal l crime . Today , smoking marijuana is a “ crime , ” and , in some place in the U.S. , so is possession of an unregistered handgun . Tomorrow , possession of any firearm , registered or not , may be made a crime , and the same thing may happen with disapproved method of child- rearing , such a spanking . In some country , expression of dissident political opinion is a crime , and there is no certainty that this will never happen in the U.S. , since no constitution or political system last forever . If a society nee d a large , powerful law enforcement establishment , then there is something gravely wrong with that society ; it must be subjecting people to severe pressure if so many refuse to follow the rule , or follow them only because forced . Many society in the past have gotten by with little or no formal law - enforcement . 27 ( Paragraph 151 ) To be sure , past society have had mean of influencing human behavior , but these have been primitive and of low effectiveness compared with the technological mean that are n ow being deve loped . 28 ( Paragraph 152 ) However , some psychologist have publicly expressed opinion indicating their contempt for human freedom . And the mathematician Claude Shannon wa quoted in 57 Omni ( August 1987 ) a saying , “ I visualize a time when we wi ll be to robot what dog are to human , and I ’ m rooting for the machine . ” 29 ( Paragraph 154 ) This is no science fiction ! After writing paragraph 154 we came across an article in Scientific American according to which scientist are actively developing te chniques for identifying possible future criminal and for treating them by a combination of biological and psychological mean . Some scientist advocate compulsory application of the treatment , which may be available in the near future . ( See “ Seeking th e Criminal Element , ” by W . Wayt Gibbs , Scientific American , March 1995 . ) Maybe you think this is okay because the treatment would be applied to those who might become violent criminal . But of course it won ’ t stop there . Next , a treatment will be applie d to those who might become drunk driver ( they endanger human life too ) , then perhaps to peel who spank their child , then to environmentalist who sabotage logging equipment , eventually to anyone whose behavior is inconvenient for the system . 30 ( Parag raph 184 ) A further advantage of nature a a counter -ideal to technology is that , in many people , nature inspires the kind of reverence that is associated with religion , so that nature could perhaps be idealized on a religious basis . It is true that in ma ny society religion ha served a a support and justification for the established order , but it is also true that religion ha often provided a basis for rebellion . Thus it may be useful to introduce a religious element into the rebellion against technology , the more so because Western society today ha no strong religious foundation . Religion , nowadays either is used a cheap and transparent support for narrow , short -sighted selfishness ( some conservative use it this way ) , or even is cynically exploit ed to make easy money ( by many evangelist ) , or ha degenerated into crude irrationalism ( fundamentalist protestant sect , “ cult ” ) , or is simply stagnant ( Catholicism , main -line Protestantism ) . The nearest thing to a strong , widespread , dynamic religion that the West ha seen in recent time ha been the quasi -religion of leftism , but leftism today is fragmented and ha no clear , unified , inspiring goal . Thus there is a religious vacuum in our society that could perhaps be filled by a religion focused on nature in opposition to technology . But it would be a mistake to try to concoct artificially a religion to fill this role . Such an invented religion would probably be a failure . Take the “ Gaia ” religion for example . Do it adherent really believe in it or are they just play -acting ? If they are just play -acting their religion will be a flop in the end . It is probably best not to try to introduce religion into the conflict of nature v . technology unless you really believe in that religion yourself and find that it arouses a deep , strong , genuine response in many other people . 31 Assuming that such a final push occurs . Conceivably the industrial system might be eliminated in a somewhat gradual or piecemeal fashion ( see paragraph 4 , 167 and Not e 32 ) . 32 ( Paragraph 193 ) It is even conceivable ( remotely ) that the revolution might consist only of a massive change of attitude toward technology resulting in a relatively gradual and painless disintegration of the industrial system . But if this happens we ’ ll be very lucky . It ’ s far more probably that the transition to a non- technological society will be very difficult and full of conflict and disaster . 33 ( Paragraph 195 ) The economic and technological structure of a society are far more important than it political structure in determining the way the average man life ( see paragraph 95 , 119 and Notes 16 , 18 ) . 58 34 ( Paragraph 215 ) This statement refers to our particular brand of anarchism . A wide variety of social attitude have been called “ anarchist , ” and i t may be that many who consider themselves anarchist would not accept our statement of paragraph 215 . It should be noted , by the way , that there is a nonviolent anarchist movement whose member probably would not accept FC a anarchist and certainly would not approve of FC ’ s violent method . 35 ( Paragraph 219 ) Many leftist are motivated also by hostility , but the hostility probably result in part from a frustrated need for power . 36 ( Paragraph 229 ) It is important to understand that we mean someone who sym pathizes with these movement a they exist today in our society . One who belief that woman , homosexual , etc. , should have equal right is not necessary a leftist . The feminist , gay right , etc. , movement that exist in our society have the particular ideological tone that characterizes leftism , and if one belief , for example , that woman should have equal right it doe not necessarily follow that one must sympathize with the feminist movement a it exists today . 